[Amit Varma]: Before you listen to this episode of The Scene and the Unseen, I have a recommendation for
[Amit Varma]: you.
[Amit Varma]: Do check out Pulya Bazi, hosted by Saurabh Chandra and Pranay Kotesane, two really good
[Amit Varma]: friends of mine.
[Amit Varma]: Kick-ass podcast in Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: It's amazing.
[Amit Varma]: In 2014, when the BJP swept the general elections, commentators spoke about the Modi wave.
[Amit Varma]: Some people were stunned by the size of this wave.
[Amit Varma]: But maybe they would not have been so surprised if they'd followed the cultural, social and
[Amit Varma]: political currents behind this wave.
[Amit Varma]: Narendra Modi's rise to power did not start in 2002 when the Gujarat riots happened, or
[Amit Varma]: 1992 when the Babri Masjid was demolished in Ayodhya, or even 1980 when the BJP was
[Amit Varma]: founded.
[Amit Varma]: These currents, in some form or another, go back decades, if not centuries.
[Amit Varma]: They started gathering force and were given direction around a century ago, and it was
[Amit Varma]: such a well-organized, well-thought-out, powerful force that I am surprised that we didn't have
[Amit Varma]: a Hindu Rashtra long, long ago.
[Amit Varma]: The book that I will discuss on the show today is ostensibly a book of history, but it will
[Amit Varma]: reveal the true nature of modern India more than almost any other book you can find in
[Amit Varma]: the market.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science.
[Unknown]: Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm honored to have the journalist and author Akshay Mukul as my guest today, and we'll
[Amit Varma]: be chatting about his brilliant book, Gita Press and the Making of Hindu India.
[Amit Varma]: There's been a common question asked in recent years, sometimes with genuine curiosity and
[Amit Varma]: sometimes with mockery.
[Amit Varma]: Where are the intellectuals of the right wing?
[Amit Varma]: I explored this question myself in an episode I did a few months ago called The Intellectual
[Amit Varma]: Foundations of Hindutva, where I chatted with Aakar Patel, who is writing a book on the
[Amit Varma]: Hindu Rashtra.
[Amit Varma]: At the end of the episode, Aakar and I concluded that there isn't really much there.
[Amit Varma]: On reading Akshay's book, I realized that we were perhaps too glib.
[Amit Varma]: There is an organized intellectual tradition within the Hindutva movement, and there has
[Amit Varma]: been coherence and consistency over the decades.
[Amit Varma]: Maybe people like me have discounted it because our first language is English and we don't
[Amit Varma]: read the Hindi press, and maybe we discounted it because we have such contempt for the founding
[Amit Varma]: principles of this tradition that we hesitate to call it intellectual.
[Amit Varma]: Either way, it's our mistake and our loss.
[Amit Varma]: Without understanding these intellectual currents, I don't believe we can understand India.
[Amit Varma]: And we will continue to be surprised, election after election, as our elite little bubble
[Amit Varma]: continues to count for nothing.
[Amit Varma]: Also, all our talk of getting our ideas into the culture stand for nothing.
[Amit Varma]: If we cannot understand our culture in the first place, and the forces that shaped it.
[Amit Varma]: Gita Press and The Making of Hindu India is an eye-opening book.
[Amit Varma]: But before I begin my conversations with Akshay, let's take a quick commercial break.
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that Parsis in Mumbai, instead of being left at the Tower of Silence after
[Amit Varma]: they die, are now cremated?
[Amit Varma]: And why?
[Amit Varma]: Because a cow fell sick in the early 1990s?
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that the smog in Delhi is caused by something that farmers in Punjab do, and
[Amit Varma]: that there's no way to stop them?
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that there wasn't one gas tragedy in Bhopal, but three?
[Amit Varma]: One of them was seen, but two were unseen?
[Amit Varma]: Did you know that many well-intentioned government policies hurt the people they're supposed
[Amit Varma]: to help?
[Amit Varma]: Why was demonetization a bad idea?
[Amit Varma]: How should GST have been implemented?
[Amit Varma]: Why are all our politicians so corrupt, when not all of them are bad people?
[Amit Varma]: I'm Amit Verma, and in my weekly podcast, The Seen and the Unseen, I take a shot at
[Amit Varma]: answering all these questions and many more.
[Amit Varma]: I aim to go beyond the scene and show you the unseen effects of public policy and private
[Amit Varma]: action.
[Amit Varma]: I speak to experts on economics, political philosophy, cognitive neuroscience, and constitutional
[Amit Varma]: law, so that their insights can blow not only my mind, but also yours.
[Amit Varma]: The Seen and the Unseen releases every Monday.
[Amit Varma]: So do check out the archives and follow the show at seenunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: You can also subscribe to The Seen and the Unseen on whatever podcast app you happen
[Amit Varma]: to prefer.
[Amit Varma]: Akshay, welcome to The Seen and the Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you, Amit, for having me.
[Amit Varma]: Akshay, tell me a little bit about yourself.
[Amit Varma]: How did you become a journalist?
[Guest]: How did your journey start?
[Guest]: I grew up in Ranchi.
[Guest]: I'm originally from Bihar, but I grew up in Ranchi, which is now Jharkhand.
[Guest]: So it was, it's a very cosmopolitan, I grew up in an industrial township.
[Guest]: And we grew up without getting too much affected by caste or religion, because, you know, for
[Guest]: years I had Goan neighbors or Garhwali neighbors, because you know, this is how industrial towns
[Guest]: are.
[Guest]: And I studied there till my plus two, which is I did intermediate, went to JVS college
[Guest]: there.
[Guest]: And then I came to Delhi University, where I studied history, I majored in history.
[Guest]: And then, well, like everyone from Bihar, or that part of the world, tries a hand at
[Guest]: civil services, which I did one attempt.
[Guest]: And then I thought, no, that's something maybe I'm, it's not for me, I just couldn't clear
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: I just couldn't even clear prelims.
[Guest]: So I went for, I thought journalism, I tried journalism, I went to IMC.
[Guest]: And then I joined, I worked four places, started with Asian Age, which was just launched.
[Unknown]: And it was like talk of the town, it was one of the biggest thing to happen in the early
[Unknown]: 90s.
[Unknown]: Then worked in Pioneer for three and a half years, then in a way changed hands.
[Guest]: Then I moved to Hindustan Times, where I worked for exactly two years.
[Unknown]: And then Times of India, where I worked for almost 17 years.
[Unknown]: And then now I kind of quit, now I'm off journalism.
[Unknown]: I quit in 2017.
[Unknown]: And since then, I'm kind of on my own now.
[Amit Varma]: And what kind of journalism attracted you?
[Guest]: Well, journalism, when I had grown up reading all kinds of journalism, I'm talking of M.
[Guest]: J. Akbar of those days, not the M. J. Akbar of now, when he was editing Telegraph and
[Guest]: growing up in Ranchi, and Telegraph was launched, and it was in the paper in Ranchi always normally
[Guest]: comes in the evening.
[Guest]: But one waited for that paper.
[Guest]: And even waited for Indian Express or Times of India, which all came in the evening because
[Guest]: there were no Patna editions, no other editions.
[Guest]: So Delhi edition will come by air and will come in the evening.
[Guest]: One was really attracted to the kind of journalism which was happening those days with, you know,
[Guest]: Bhagarpur blindings happened, Arun Souri was there, M. J. Akbar was there.
[Guest]: And these people were taking on the establishment.
[Guest]: And when I joined profession in late 93, early 94, these people were still there, Arun Souri
[Guest]: was no longer working in active journalism, but Akbar was, I joined his paper.
[Guest]: Other people, Chandan Mitra, other people who one had grown up reading.
[Guest]: So there was this whole thing on this right on the genuine issues of the country, right
[Guest]: on the politics.
[Guest]: And it was a phase when Congress was dominating.
[Guest]: And although it was like the fag end of Congress dominance, but still Congress was very much
[Guest]: the dominating force.
[Guest]: And there was this whole larger alliance of anti-Congressism happening, socialists, leftists,
[Guest]: even BJP, all of them were coming together.
[Guest]: So it was a very, very interesting phase when I joined journalism.
[Guest]: I remember in 93, one of the, this 94, in fact, this Andhra election was taking place.
[Guest]: And this was a one big election.
[Guest]: I think Chandra Babu Naidu had managed to come back, it was, I remember, it was a big
[Guest]: election.
[Guest]: Then, of course, that was a phase of instability, we saw governments after governments come
[Guest]: and go from 89 onwards, only five years of Narsimha Rao, five stable years of 96, 98,
[Guest]: 99.
[Guest]: And then the stability, now we are in a stable phase.
[Guest]: And once all that, you know, I was in HD when Kargil happened, I covered Kargil in a very
[Guest]: different way.
[Guest]: I covered post-Kargil, I traveled, I remember from Meerut to Tehri Garhwal, Pauri Garhwal,
[Guest]: just talking, going to the families who had lost their children, their sons, brothers,
[Guest]: you know, husbands, and the whole futility of war, what goes in the family, one could
[Guest]: see it firsthand, and a lot more things are happening in terms of religious politics,
[Guest]: because you know, 92 was very fresh, 92 had happened, politics had gone for a complete
[Guest]: chin, Mandal had happened.
[Guest]: So it was very, very, we saw United Front government, we saw six years of Bajpayee rule,
[Guest]: 99, and then he again, 98, 14 months, and then five years from 99 to 2004.
[Guest]: And I covered, I started basically as a feature writer, I was writing on arts and culture.
[Guest]: And I must have interviewed all the writers, poets, painters, you can think of, because
[Guest]: Pioneer was the only paper those days, which had a dedicated arts page five days a week.
[Guest]: And it was a very serious arts page, very, very serious people were writing, very serious
[Guest]: columnists were there, and we got really into the subject.
[Guest]: So and then we had a very good weekend paper for which I wrote a lot.
[Guest]: Then I moved to writing more and more on politics while I was still there.
[Guest]: And while I moved to HD, it was again part of the Sunday team, but it was writing more
[Guest]: on politics.
[Guest]: And that's where I covered, I had a lot of experience doing varied things.
[Guest]: For instance, I, much before this Gujarat thing, I remember doing a full page on Gujarat
[Guest]: as Hindutva Laboratory.
[Guest]: And they were outraged that how he's saying this, and this was way back in 99.
[Guest]: Then I did on this whole how they were trying to, what they're trying to do with syllabus,
[Guest]: NCRT syllabus.
[Guest]: And I remember Murali Manohar Joshi getting very hassled about it, he was HRD minister.
[Guest]: I did a lot on, I wrote on the Narmada Bachao Andolan, which was in a very crucial phase,
[Guest]: which was kind of in a way, disintegrating, you know, that was the last rally for the
[Guest]: valley I remember in 99 or early 2000.
[Guest]: So we did a lot of interesting stuff.
[Guest]: And then I came to Daily Grind in Times of India, where I was covering political parties,
[Guest]: Parliament, I was doing a dedicated ministry, like HRD ministry, or culture ministry, which
[Guest]: gave you a ringside view of how government functions, what happens, how decisions are
[Guest]: taken or not taken, or made and made.
[Guest]: And Parliament, of course, teaches you, you see closely how legislation happens, how things
[Guest]: work, how politicians, how political parties come together on certain issues, how on certain
[Guest]: issues, whatever might be the rhetoric outside, deep within, they're all together, you know,
[Guest]: so you see all those things happening very closely.
[Guest]: So it was a very, very good, very enriching experience.
[Guest]: And I was lucky to work with some of the very, very good editors, you know, I worked with
[Unknown]: Bharat Bhushan, I worked with Chandan Mitra, worked with Beer Sanghvi for a while in Hindustan
[Guest]: Times.
[Guest]: I had NHD, I had all, Padgaonkar was just kind of the last days of Padgaonkar in Times
[Guest]: of India.
[Guest]: But yeah, one knew him, one could always go up to him.
[Guest]: Then we had people like Siddharth Varadarajan, Manoj Joshi, you know, so it was a very, very
[Guest]: good.
[Guest]: Later on, changes happened in Times of India around 2004, early 2004.
[Guest]: Because somewhere BJP, I think it was a complete coup, a lot of people had to move out and
[Guest]: the people who was considered very close to the government took over.
[Guest]: But then the election they lost.
[Guest]: And after that, and one has actually I consider 2004 and 2009, actually the UPA 2, that's
[Guest]: when it started deteriorating.
[Guest]: And now, in 2014, I was very much there when Modi came to power.
[Guest]: And you could see for the first time, you know, you're always second guessing the your
[Guest]: boss political bosses, you're thinking what's happening, not happening, which is not to
[Guest]: say that was not happening during Congress regime.
[Guest]: I know of Congress ministers who would constantly buzzer editors and owners saying that why
[Guest]: my particular kind of picture gets published, please ensure that it never comes out again.
[Guest]: But it's become far worse.
[Amit Varma]: Now it's happening at a different level, all together.
[Amit Varma]: I had a young political scientist on my show a few weeks ago called Rahul Verma, and who's
[Amit Varma]: just written this book called Ideology and Identity.
[Amit Varma]: And Rahul made a very interesting point that because he grew up essentially reading Hindi
[Amit Varma]: newspapers every day, he got a very different view of India from what his peers have today.
[Amit Varma]: I'm just wondering that in your case, you grew up in Ranchi, and obviously, your Hindi
[Guest]: is excellent, because you know,
[Guest]: Yeah, my family has been a very bilingual family has been a stress.
[Guest]: So that's how I got used to Hindi literature.
[Guest]: I read Hindi literature a lot, when I was growing up, I continue to and I feel we have
[Guest]: added this completely false sense of I don't know what to call it, but by you know, reading
[Guest]: Hindi or reading any other language, it's not about Hindi reading, I have Telugu friends
[Guest]: who are my generation who kind of regret their children not reading, I regret my daughter
[Guest]: not reading Hindi as much.
[Guest]: I don't know, maybe I tried too much.
[Guest]: Maybe I didn't try enough.
[Guest]: Maybe there's something wrong.
[Guest]: But I feel very bad that the children all coming up with a single language, English
[Guest]: speaking people.
[Guest]: So that way, yes, I was lucky.
[Guest]: What Rahul told you, he's absolutely right, your sensibilities, your the way you see the
[Guest]: world completely changes, because Hindi newspapers in the literature introduce you to world,
[Guest]: which exists in which we and we are not aware of, you know, for instance, say someone reading
[Guest]: a book like Raag Darbari, I must have read it, I think I was just out of school or something.
[Guest]: And so nothing after that, nothing shocks you, you know, you feel that, okay, this is
[Amit Varma]: so true, he was, you know.
[Guest]: And you realize the power of literature, more than any other work of nonfiction.
[Amit Varma]: Absolutely.
[Unknown]: Absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, Rahul and I discussed Raag Darbari also.
[Guest]: When you see this India that we are inhabiting now, you realize that, oh God, you know, just
[Guest]: say this how I met Mr. Lal Sughal much, much later, and I just couldn't imagine, yeah,
[Guest]: he was a man who had a great sense of humour.
[Guest]: And I was kind of trying to ask him, what is the process?
[Guest]: How did he?
[Guest]: He said, you know, I was just, he was an administrator.
[Guest]: So he had seen India, he had an added perspective, how things work, what happens.
[Guest]: So he brought everything there and nothing has changed.
[Guest]: This is the India of Srilal Sughal, Raag Darbari has not changed at all, if you ask me, nothing
[Amit Varma]: has changed.
[Amit Varma]: All of those fundamental things, the way the bureaucracy works, the way people think, it's
[Amit Varma]: just flat out the same.
[Amit Varma]: So I can't help but ask you that, okay, so, you know, you went to college and you did
[Amit Varma]: a degree in history.
[Amit Varma]: And typically people of my generation and earlier generations, what we did a degree
[Amit Varma]: on we just happened to do it, it wasn't really a real interest, degree karo, uske baad jo
[Amit Varma]: karna hai karo.
[Amit Varma]: And but in your case, there is this interesting symmetry that you do a degree in history,
[Amit Varma]: and you spend these decades in journalism, and then you write this great book of history.
[Guest]: See, I have been a kind of history junkie, I have been kind of, I have been genuinely
[Guest]: interested in history.
[Guest]: And in fact, a lot of my friends who are in academics, they always joke that, you know,
[Guest]: when a new book comes on history, he probably buys or reads before us, you know.
[Guest]: So I have this, my entire money goes in books.
[Guest]: That's all I've done in life.
[Guest]: If someone asks me, I've done nothing, but only bought books.
[Guest]: Pretty much the same.
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So nothing.
[Guest]: I live behind nothing, just books.
[Guest]: And I have been genuinely interested reading new kinds of history, what is happening worldwide
[Guest]: new trends.
[Guest]: And one can see how the history writing also changed the time when I was in college to
[Guest]: subsequently and then some books completely kind of, like, for instance, this book that
[Guest]: I'm talking about Francis Corsini's in the public some days, I'm getting not getting
[Guest]: the title right.
[Guest]: And then Vasudha Dalmia's book on nationalization of Hindu tradition on Banaras.
[Guest]: You find that this is saying something which is first time history writing or don't call
[Guest]: it history, don't call it it's a kind of a literary history of a different kind of things
[Guest]: which no one bothered about your history books never told you.
[Guest]: And they're talking about creation of mindsets, how mindsets became what they become, you
[Guest]: know, what we are seeing now.
[Guest]: So Vasudha Dalmia's is a great book, which talks of how this whole thing started in a
[Guest]: city like Banaras, the role of Bharatendu Harishchandra.
[Guest]: Francis Corsini takes it even forward.
[Guest]: Charu Gupta comes, who brings out, if you ever thought that Hindi literature was all
[Guest]: about nationalism or patriotism and everything, she talks of sexuality, obscenity in Hindi
[Guest]: literature, not literature, she's even talking about journals, and it's a path breaking book
[Guest]: actually.
[Guest]: And then you grew up in a place where you see that Gita Press is there all the time,
[Guest]: you know, in any ordinary Hindu household, they need not be rabidly communal or anything.
[Guest]: It's a very secular household, it was coming, it was coming for your grandparents, someone
[Guest]: was reading somewhere, you know, and if you ask anyone, everyone knew about Gita Press
[Guest]: and everyone had their own story about Gita Press.
[Guest]: So then you realize, so in fact, before I started working on it, I asked, I remember
[Guest]: Wendy Doniger, that why did she never work on it?
[Guest]: She said, well, I'm not interested so much that aspect of this thing, but it's a very
[Guest]: good idea.
[Guest]: And just then before that, there's another historian called Ulrich Stark, she did a brilliant
[Guest]: book on Naval Kishore Press of Lucknow, Kanpur, and it's an amazing book on the history of
[Guest]: this press.
[Guest]: So I kept wondering that how come there's nothing in Gita Press, everyone reads about
[Guest]: Gita Press, and that got me thinking, that got me inside Gita Press.
[Guest]: And I could easily relate to it.
[Guest]: In fact, a lot of my friends, in fact, Basudha also asked me this, that how could you relate
[Guest]: to this?
[Guest]: I could relate to it also, because as you said, right in the beginning, you know, because
[Guest]: of reading is multiple things in languages, Hindi.
[Guest]: So you know, that was not a kind of alien thing, I didn't have any problem thinking
[Guest]: about working on Gita Press, it was not something, you know, formidable for me.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, a book is, I mean, much more than the history of a printing press.
[Amit Varma]: It's also to me the history of the whole Hindutva movement.
[Amit Varma]: It's in a sense, bits of it are also a very fascinating sociological study of Marwaris
[Unknown]: and how their social position changed.
[Unknown]: And of course, the main people behind the Gita Press were Marwaris.
[Amit Varma]: And I was staggered at one point when I came across these figures in your book, I'll just
[Amit Varma]: quote them.
[Amit Varma]: As of February 2014, 71.9 million copies of the Gita have been sold.
[Amit Varma]: This is Gita Press applications.
[Amit Varma]: For the Ramcharitmanas and other works by Goswami Tulsidas, the figure is 70 million
[Amit Varma]: copies, while 19 million copies of the Puranas, Upanishads and ancient scriptures have been
[Amit Varma]: sold.
[Amit Varma]: Then there are the tracts and monographs on the duties of ideal Hindu women and children,
[Amit Varma]: of which 94.8 million copies have been sold so far, while more than 65 million copies
[Amit Varma]: of stories from India's mythic past, biographies of saints and devotional songs have been bought.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, you also, for example, talking about every year they used to bring out these
[Amit Varma]: special issues and talking about in 1938, they got out Manasankh, which was in Ramcharitmanas.
[Amit Varma]: And there you write, quote, the very first print run was of 40,600 copies.
[Amit Varma]: And by late 1983, a total of 5.69 million copies had been printed, a record unparalleled
[Amit Varma]: in the work of Indian publishing.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, maybe I should be ashamed of this, but I had no idea that something so...
[Guest]: Well, if you...
[Guest]: See, in fact, there's a friend of mine from Rachi, who grew up differently, that's all
[Guest]: I tell him.
[Guest]: I tease him.
[Guest]: He said, how come I was not aware?
[Guest]: Then I said, why don't you ask your parents, maybe, ask your mother, she'll be aware of
[Guest]: it.
[Guest]: And he said, no, even she won't be aware.
[Guest]: I said, no, try it.
[Guest]: Then he found out that, yes, they knew somehow he was not interested.
[Guest]: His interests lie elsewhere.
[Guest]: So, you know, it's about...
[Guest]: But you know, I can safely tell you while I was working on it, I have friends across
[Guest]: who work across professions, you know, friends who are like very in corporate world from
[Guest]: university years.
[Guest]: And if you tell them Gita Press, the brand recall itself told me the story that even
[Guest]: if they don't know anything about Gita Press, they know about it.
[Guest]: They know of, they've heard of Gita Press.
[Guest]: And as far as the numbers, even I was staggered.
[Guest]: And I took it from their website.
[Guest]: I didn't want to be kind of...
[Guest]: And their website says it.
[Guest]: And there won't be any single, in North India at least, any single in the Hindu household
[Guest]: where, you know, even a scholar who keeps a copy of, say, Ramayana for some study or
[Guest]: something, he'll say, okay, boss, let's get the Gita Press version, English as well as
[Guest]: Hindi.
[Guest]: Even Mahabharata, because it's cleaner, it's well brought out, it's a very high production
[Guest]: quality.
[Guest]: All the books have very high production, even Kalyan, very high production quality.
[Guest]: Kalyan being the magazine.
[Guest]: Being the journal, yeah, magazine.
[Guest]: And the idea of also gifting religious texts, if you go to city like Banaras or Gorakhpur,
[Guest]: you'll find that there is, or even Delhi, the Delhi store in Chandni Chowk, in that
[Guest]: old Delhi, certain books, if you call up and say, do you have this?
[Guest]: No, it's just run out of here, you'll have to wait for a week.
[Guest]: And so it constantly sells.
[Guest]: And then in Ramayana, then they have this thing called what they call Gutka, which is
[Guest]: basically smaller, miniature version of Ramayana.
[Guest]: You're on the road, you can't carry the fat volume, so you can read it.
[Guest]: But that itself sells in lakhs and lakhs.
[Guest]: And these figures also, don't forget, would be what they export.
[Guest]: And huge diaspora population relies on, they're the big clientele in this diaspora population,
[Guest]: because they were the first ones to even think of, I will not say first one, the early ones,
[Guest]: who in 1934, started an English journal called Kalyan Kalpataru.
[Guest]: Because they said, well, we have to do something about them.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, in your book, you've got accounts of various people, both Indians and non-Indians
[Guest]: writing from abroad.
[Guest]: And they were trying to track people who could write, even non-Hindus, great scholars of
[Guest]: Hinduism, Jainism, they were trying to get them to write, to give it that kind of very
[Amit Varma]: eclectic feel about it.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of go back to the starting of it.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about sort of the impetus behind the Gita Press to start off.
[Amit Varma]: And in your book, you mentioned that there are sort of three factors.
[Amit Varma]: And let's kind of take them one by one.
[Amit Varma]: And the first factor that you mentioned is the consolidation of Hindi.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a little bit about, I mean, all of us take Hindi for granted, like it's been
[Unknown]: there forever.
[Amit Varma]: But in a sense, Hindi was a political project of its own.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was because see, this whole movement in which Madan Mohan Malviya played a big
[Guest]: role, and 1900, which is called the MacDonald moment, which is actually not my corners,
[Guest]: Alok Rai's corners, which I find absolutely brilliant corners.
[Guest]: 1900 is when the petition finally leads to something.
[Guest]: To recognize Hindi as a separate court language.
[Guest]: Look at that, you know, very smart move.
[Guest]: Once you change it in court, subsequently, it has its impact, you know, it's, it has
[Guest]: its ripple effect.
[Guest]: And a lot of things are happening simultaneously.
[Guest]: There is the soul, Hindi is now finally found some place at the cost of Persian.
[Guest]: Then what happens, the print technology is just coming, which is slowly settling down.
[Guest]: And Marwari's are investors, we find in most in North India, most of the publishing houses
[Guest]: Marwari's were investing, and for philanthropic reasons too.
[Guest]: And then Hindi is coming.
[Guest]: So first quarter of the 20th century is kind of a golden phase of publishing.
[Guest]: And Hindi journals are coming one after the other, one after the other, English journals
[Guest]: are also coming, like, firstly, you have this great modern review coming from Calcutta.
[Guest]: But Ramanand Chatterjee was a completely different sort of person.
[Guest]: He was also paying for Bisal Bharat.
[Guest]: Yeah, so in fact, Calcutta became a big center of Hindi publishing.
[Guest]: So you had Saraswati coming from Calcutta, you had Bisal Bharat, which continued till
[Guest]: 70s, actually.
[Guest]: And in those days, in 1930s, late 30s, he was incurring a loss of 70,000 rupees, but
[Guest]: he was still publishing it.
[Guest]: So what I'm trying to say is that it was a golden phase of, now, in that all the journals
[Guest]: which were coming, were very general in nature, mostly literary, say, Saraswati or Bisal Bharat,
[Guest]: it will have a bit of politics, a bit of literature, a bit of poetry, you know, the usual, some
[Guest]: international news, but very well brought out.
[Guest]: Gita Press, in a way, is the first one which is exclusively devoted to religion.
[Guest]: There were a few other attempts made.
[Guest]: And it came also because, you know, Marwari, there has been a churning happening within
[Guest]: the Marwari world, because there was a section which was not kind of happy with what the
[Guest]: newfound wealth was doing to the community.
[Guest]: As it is, as Goenka at one point says, we are being equated with Jews, and you know,
[Guest]: we have this thing of us, you know, we're taking money, you know, lending on high rate
[Amit Varma]: of interest.
[Guest]: And so, there was this churning happening within and there was this, Marwaris were known
[Guest]: for the ostentatious display of wealth, and the marriages and various other things.
[Guest]: So there was this two stream like Jamnalal Bajaj you had, GD Birla, whoever, the moderate
[Guest]: ones.
[Guest]: To deal with there were two ways, like Jamnalal Bajaj and also just stop doing this, become
[Guest]: Gandhian.
[Guest]: There's this other world of Jai Dayal Goenka, Hanuman Prasad Poddar, and also the answer
[Guest]: lies in going back to our roots, and basically celebrating the Sanatan Dharm.
[Guest]: And that, you know, Sanatan, this is what we had a great past, which was interrupted by Muslim
[Guest]: rule and now British rule.
[Guest]: And so we have to go back to that period when we were doing extremely well in everything,
[Guest]: you know, science, literature, and that's this whole thing, Kalyan finds a place.
[Guest]: So one motive was, of course, that introspection for the community, but there was a larger
[Guest]: good also involved that, you know, the country should go back to its ancient roots.
[Amit Varma]: And that's when we were kind of doing very well.
[Amit Varma]: No, and I find it interesting that, you know, in a sense, the political core of both the
[Amit Varma]: rise of Hindi and the establishment of the Gita Press and Kalyan seems to be the same,
[Amit Varma]: which is harking back to a mythical past and leaving aside Hindustani, which is this conglomeration
[Unknown]: of Urdu and Persian and whatever, and creating Hindi for the Hindus, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And really, like you point out in 1877, Bhartendu Harishchandra gave this speech called Hinni
[Unknown]: ki unnati par vyakhya hai.
[Guest]: And from there, of course, he dies young.
[Amit Varma]: It kind of becomes a political movement and it totally makes sense that then the journal
[Amit Varma]: which is set up really to take that politics forward beyond just the religious aspect of
[Amit Varma]: it is in Hindi and it all kind of seems to come together.
[Amit Varma]: I also found your whole account of the churn in the Marwari community very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: For example, I'll quote again from your book, with Marwari, quote, with Marwari domination
[Amit Varma]: of the growth of Indian capitalism in the late 19th and early 20th century, two crucial
[Amit Varma]: but contradictory things happened, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And one is because they are the trading class and they're looking for profit and all that,
[Amit Varma]: they become the butt of jokes like the Jews did elsewhere.
[Amit Varma]: And the second you point out is, you quote a historian who talks about this semi involuntary
[Amit Varma]: upward mobility.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: I know.
[Amit Varma]: It's fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: In which Vaishyas become the new Kshatriyas.
[Guest]: So in fact, you know, because it was a money, cloud of money, you find that Marwaris, if
[Guest]: you follow Sanatan Dharam for a second, for argument's sake, not that one believes in
[Guest]: it is that Marwaris had no business to be wearing sacred thread, right?
[Guest]: But because of the money, you find that their entire ritual got Brahmanized.
[Guest]: Then you find the temples, schools, the hospitals, you know, sarais, inns, whatever they were
[Guest]: making, everywhere started bearing plaque of wealthy Marwari who helped in building
[Guest]: it or repairing it.
[Guest]: It's not a phenomenon.
[Guest]: You will not find it a single plaque.
[Guest]: As one of my historian friends says, pre 20th century period, Marwaris were still coming
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: It's only after around the first quarter of 20th century, that they had to establish themselves
[Guest]: to deal with this infamy that they were being equated with Jews, that, you know, the money
[Guest]: making thing was becoming a bit of a problem for the community.
[Guest]: And there was a churning within also, there was this whole thought process that we should
[Guest]: do something.
[Guest]: In fact, there's a historian, he's not a historian, he's kind of a chronicler among Marwaris called
[Guest]: Jamini Barua, who did a completely, I wish someone could have just put it together in
[Guest]: a very different way.
[Guest]: He did a book called Main Apni Marwari Jati Se Pyar Karta Hoon.
[Guest]: And he brings up, I had to kind of really work hard to get that, all those six volumes.
[Guest]: But he just puts together every single act of philanthropy that Marwaris did till the
[Guest]: period that he did book and across India.
[Guest]: So this was very, very important to Marwaris for getting this whole Brahmanical rituals
[Guest]: in the marriages also, like a lot of my Marwari friends have told me that a lot of rituals
[Guest]: are completely Brahmanical, which was not happening, say back home in Rajasthan or anything.
[Guest]: So that that period becomes very crucial.
[Guest]: A lot of things are happening in the Marwari world, social, business, you know, in their
[Guest]: business life and the social life.
[Amit Varma]: So in fact, in your book, you talk about the philanthropy and then you say, quote, through
[Amit Varma]: such initiatives, Marwaris replaced the aristocracy and wealthy landlords as religious patrons
[Amit Varma]: and changed the Kshatriya Brahman interface of Hindu society to a Vaishya Brahman interface
[Amit Varma]: that eventually resulted in the Marwariization of Hinduism, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems to me that what was really happening here was a marriage of convenience where the
[Amit Varma]: Brahmans need the patronage of the Marwaris and the Marwaris are buying respectability
[Unknown]: through this alliance.
[Unknown]: Absolutely.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: It was mutual.
[Guest]: They were trying to help each other and Kshatriyas never had that kind of, you know, they didn't
[Guest]: really have, they could fight your war, they could fight your battle, but that's it.
[Unknown]: And in this age, Rajput valor is pointless.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting how the proximate impetus for the Gita Press actually comes from a sort
[Amit Varma]: of an argument within the Marwari community where you talk about how in the oppressive
[Amit Varma]: Delhi heat of March, April 1926, there's an 8th annual conference of the All India Marwari
[Amit Varma]: Agarwal Mahasabha.
[Amit Varma]: And there, there's an argument between JD Birla and Atmaram Khemka and Atmaram Khemka
[Amit Varma]: is talking about Sanatan Dharma and this is the direction we should go in.
[Amit Varma]: And JD Birla is saying, look, this is not the platform for that.
[Guest]: If you want, why don't you do a journal?
[Guest]: And that's how this journal comes about.
[Guest]: And then they have a train journey, Rohtak and all that happens.
[Guest]: So it's actually fascinating to come to and look at this larger network of Marwaris also
[Guest]: how they're helping out.
[Guest]: See, the idea takes place somewhere in, you know, what is Haryana and Bajaj Press, the
[Guest]: family in Bombay, which are like the big publishers, they still apparently own the big mainland
[Guest]: money, the press land, because what they had from those days, they had a paper also, Benkatesh
[Guest]: Samachar or something, and they were big publishers in those days.
[Guest]: And he agrees to just do it for a year, just take my press, do it, I think almost 14 months
[Amit Varma]: he did it.
[Guest]: And meanwhile, Goenka is in Calcutta, Anuman Prasad Poddar is the one who then he moves
[Guest]: to after, when he moves to Gorakhpur, he moves to Gorakhpur.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: These are two of the impetuses, which kind of two of the stimuli which made the Gita
[Amit Varma]: Press happen.
[Amit Varma]: One, the growth of Hindi as a political movement, and then within the culture as a language
[Amit Varma]: that people speak and write in, and of course, this Marwari movement where they are getting
[Amit Varma]: more integrated into that mainstream of Hinduism with their so called, with their putative
[Amit Varma]: alliance with the Brahmins.
[Amit Varma]: The third element that you point out is that the 1920s are a hotbed of political communalism.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, like you write about how there were 91 Hindu Muslim riots in United Provinces
[Amit Varma]: between 1923 and 1927.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a memorable time because Savarkar's Hindutva comes out in 1923, the RSS is founded
[Amit Varma]: in 1925.
[Amit Varma]: And also, which is, you know, the Hindu Mahasabha is a very powerful party at this time, much
[Amit Varma]: more so then than it is today.
[Amit Varma]: And also within the Congress, there is a very strong stream of Hindu traditionalists like
[Guest]: Madan Mohan Malviya.
[Guest]: And who was also a member of Hindu Mahasabha, you're a member of Congress also.
[Amit Varma]: Founded the Banaras Hindu University.
[Amit Varma]: Just lay out that political landscape for me of the time and where sort of Hindu nationalism
[Guest]: fits in.
[Guest]: See, they were, I think, till late 19, I think somewhere till 1930s, meeting of Gorakshini
[Guest]: Sabha and Congress, Hindu Mahasabha and all the members, you could be a member of both.
[Guest]: So Congress, when it now regrets and says, doesn't actually look back at its past, especially
[Guest]: very dominant class within the Congress, Nehru and Gandhi's, they managed to battle this
[Guest]: group, this dominant class within the party.
[Guest]: But they were always there.
[Guest]: You know, you have Malviya, you had Govind Ballopant, much later, you had Govind Das.
[Guest]: So, you know, there's this whole stream of people who were very aligned to the Hindu
[Guest]: cause.
[Guest]: But they also knew Congress was the party which had a future.
[Amit Varma]: I was fascinated by one of the nuggets in your book that back in 1891, a Gaurakshini
[Amit Varma]: Sabha meeting took place during the Nagpur session of Congress.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah.
[Guest]: It was, see, in fact, if you look at the records, I remember this one, which leader says he
[Guest]: came out and this person who's reporting is saying he came out after giving a fiery speech
[Guest]: in the Congress session and walked straight into the Gaurakshini Sabha.
[Guest]: What do you expect?
[Guest]: So, now, when today Congress says what it does, they don't know about their own past.
[Guest]: Actually, some of them don't.
[Guest]: Even now, in fact, the problem of Congress is even now you have that element which exists.
[Guest]: You know, this whole conundrum about whether to go to temple or not to go to temple, Rahul
[Guest]: Gandhi is a Janavdhari Hindu or not.
[Guest]: Come on.
[Guest]: So, this emanates from the past that they have, you know, and one should name names
[Guest]: in the party in the Congress, but we know who are these leaders who are constantly pushing.
[Guest]: So, in fact, someone should ask Rahul Gandhi, his whole decision to be a Janav or this temple
[Guest]: hopping, was it something which he approved of or was someone telling him to do it?
[Amit Varma]: But I guess the thing with, for example, the so-called soft Hindutva of the Congress today
[Amit Varma]: is that a lot of it seems to be merely posturing, while back in the day, a lot of the big leaders
[Guest]: of the Hindu Nationalist movement.
[Guest]: Yeah, because they were very important leaders.
[Guest]: Just see the battle that Nehru had to wage with Purushottam Das Tandon on cow.
[Guest]: Then he says, I'll resign and only someone like Nehru who had to really believe in what
[Amit Varma]: he did.
[Amit Varma]: And another battle, in fact, which Nehru lost is when the idol of Lord Ram appears magically
[Amit Varma]: in the Singh and Gobind Mallapant is then CM of UP, Lal Bahadur Shastri is Home Minister
[Amit Varma]: of UP and he tells him, get the idol removed and they ignore him.
[Guest]: They ignore.
[Guest]: Look at Rajeshwar Dayal's account when he says that nobody would listen to him.
[Unknown]: He was Home Secretary.
[Guest]: And even in case of Poddar, Poddar is among thousands of people.
[Guest]: Nobody's saying whether he was directly involved or not.
[Guest]: But yes, he was also who was suspected to have some role in Gandhi's assassination.
[Guest]: How on earth someone who was arrested even for a few days in 48, in 51, will you recommend
[Amit Varma]: him for Bharat Ratna?
[Guest]: Which Govind Mallapant did.
[Guest]: It's unimaginable.
[Guest]: But how could he even suggest and then you're saying you tear off this later.
[Guest]: That anyway was a tradition.
[Guest]: Those everyone used to say, tell everyone, tear off the letter and none of them did,
[Amit Varma]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: And now we come to the hero of the story, Hanuman Prasad Poddar, who is, of course,
[Amit Varma]: a cultural giant, which is why I think Govind Mallapant would have wanted to give him the
[Amit Varma]: Bharat Ratna.
[Amit Varma]: But he's also somewhat like Gandhi, a figure with many internal contradictions.
[Guest]: He is at one level, he's a fascinating man.
[Guest]: You really want to, he never went to university, he never went to, I mean, if you read his
[Guest]: English, it's impeccable, you see his range of readings, it's impeccable.
[Guest]: He was a fascinating editor, he was an editor who could go out of the way to, if you see
[Guest]: his letters to some of these contributors, someone teaching at Hunter College in New
[Guest]: York, his writing and he's not, he's just, he's relentless that you have to write.
[Guest]: And his whole knowledge about who's working on what all over the world is fascinating.
[Guest]: Even the new-age sadhus who are coming up in a big way in Germany, who are teaching
[Guest]: yoga, he's aware of all of them.
[Guest]: He is, the way he gets after Sampoornanand, he says, you have to, I'll keep the issue
[Guest]: on hold, but you have to write.
[Guest]: And he lets him write.
[Guest]: And when Sampoornanand, as a chief minister, writes something which is not to his liking,
[Guest]: he says, well, we'll publish it once, but we won't want any further debate on it.
[Guest]: And he makes it very clear.
[Guest]: So if you, from his point of view, he was an editor for more than 40 years, 46 years.
[Guest]: And mind you, in between, many times he'll throw tantrums, he'll leave, he'll go away,
[Guest]: but they'll never let him go away.
[Guest]: He became larger than life.
[Guest]: And on top of that, he had this whole spiritual aspect to him that he had visions of God and
[Amit Varma]: this and that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, which is very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, there was a soul origin myth about how he was born.
[Guest]: Yeah, everything.
[Guest]: So he was created.
[Guest]: So you know, they address him in a certain way in Gorakhpur.
[Guest]: So he's seen as an incarnation of God.
[Guest]: I know people who, I know one lady who's like now 90 plus, coming from a big industrialist
[Guest]: family in Delhi, who just couldn't believe, who thought that I was doing a great work
[Guest]: of God by writing on Gita Press.
[Guest]: And the kind of things that she had to say about Podar, because Podar, people saw, those
[Guest]: who believed in him, saw him no less than as an incarnation of God.
[Guest]: In fact, you quote Teji Bachchan in your book.
[Guest]: Yeah, Teji Bachchan.
[Guest]: Imagine one of the birthdays, I think seventh birthday of Ajitabh Bachchan, he's brought
[Guest]: all the way to Gorakhpur.
[Guest]: And then he did the Avadhi Gita, only at the instance of Radha Baba, who was like his guru
[Amit Varma]: and later.
[Amit Varma]: This was, yeah, and just to quote like two different, very different aspects of Podar
[Amit Varma]: and both unrelated to sort of his professional work, but personal aspects, which I found
[Amit Varma]: fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: And the first one is, of course, a spooky religious aspect.
[Amit Varma]: And you write, quote, Podar would have more visions of God in the next few years.
[Amit Varma]: In 1936, he claimed to have been met in Gita Vatika, which was where he lived, by celestials,
[Amit Varma]: a sage Narada and Angiras, the sage who received the Atharva Veda.
[Amit Varma]: Podar claimed that they explained to him concepts which are not part of the Shastras, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And another aspect of it, which is a more introspective, self-critical aspect, which
[Amit Varma]: you write about later in the book, start quote, writing to an acquaintance, Podar said he
[Amit Varma]: was not the person he had been made out to be by others.
[Amit Varma]: And neither was Gita Press anymore the ideal place to seek spiritual solace.
[Amit Varma]: And now it's Podar's words, till a few years ago, this was a good place for those involved
[Amit Varma]: in spiritual exercise.
[Amit Varma]: This place is not fulfilling, as it is marked by demonic traits like self-promotion, jealousy,
[Amit Varma]: materialism.
[Amit Varma]: And he continues, there is no limit to my meanness and misdemeanors.
[Amit Varma]: Neither could I become a good person, nor could I help my associates improve, stop quote.
[Guest]: He will get into these long phases of self-introspection where he will, all his replies to everyone
[Guest]: would be of this nature, you know, I have failed, I am here.
[Guest]: And mostly this will be when he'll be in Dalmia's factory in one place, or he'll be in Ratangarh
[Guest]: in Bikaner.
[Guest]: This also, in a way, helped building what we call now, you know, Podar brand, you know,
[Guest]: because people would know that there'll be phases, now Bhaiji, as he was called, Bhaiji
[Guest]: has gone into sulk or Bhaiji is in a different mode.
[Guest]: So he's become inaccessible.
[Guest]: But when he's talking about this whole decline, the moral values in Gita Press, that is mostly
[Guest]: because he could see what was happening around in his own family, what was happening with
[Guest]: children, not his children, but, you know, associates, the children, they were going
[Guest]: out eating, then he has problems with people going watching cinema, people eating ice cream,
[Guest]: people sharing, drinking from the same glass, which they still continue to kind of propagate,
[Guest]: you know.
[Amit Varma]: So, before we get on to sort of the Gita Press itself, how it grew, and one by one we'll
[Amit Varma]: tackle all the themes, the broad themes that come up, there was an intriguing sidelight,
[Amit Varma]: which was, you write about this thing called the Roda Conspiracy, which this is well before
[Guest]: the Gita Press around 1950s, 1960s, when he was growing up in Calcutta, when he was growing
[Unknown]: up and some Marwaris were involved in this, he himself was arrested.
[Amit Varma]: And it's very interesting that the Marwaris managed to hush up the matter and they get
[Amit Varma]: him out and then they almost seem to take a decision as a community that we are not
[Amit Varma]: going to get into this kind of politics.
[Amit Varma]: We are going to do our dhandu and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: And my question is that, is this also to some extent, one of the many reasons that the Hindutva
[Amit Varma]: movement was never anti-colonial, like later when the Gita Press got into politics, it
[Amit Varma]: got into politics against fellow nationalists, you know, against Nehru and against the Congress,
[Guest]: that never against a British person.
[Guest]: Because see, for them, commerce was, nothing came before commerce.
[Guest]: It was for commerce that they left their family, wife, children, everyone behind Rajasthan.
[Guest]: This community was very focused.
[Guest]: And despite all the joke and whatever, you know, this larger thing which was said about
[Guest]: Marwaris, that didn't deter them from the path.
[Guest]: And here comes something which would have completely destroyed them.
[Guest]: If you see the pages of Kolkata Samachar, which was edited by Jhaber Mal Sharma, who
[Guest]: was also Marwari, they first tried to, because I was trying to track what they're saying,
[Guest]: because it was very important what Kolkata Samachar says.
[Guest]: So they're saying, kuch Marwariyon ki giraftari hui hai, and then they give names, GD Birla
[Guest]: is also there, one of them, by the way, and who absconded.
[Guest]: And people say that he went to Ooty and fellow Marwaris who got arrested, they said that
[Guest]: those days, apparently, more than a lakh was paid.
[Guest]: Can you believe it?
[Guest]: What the money would be?
[Amit Varma]: Now, crores, easily.
[Guest]: And that gentleman, that police officer, later on, which is even more interesting, I think
[Guest]: Medha's biography of Birla says, he or someone else wrote it that that gentleman, police
[Guest]: officer later, after retirement from police, was heading the London operations.
[Guest]: So this immediately, so first thing they did was, they just said that, okay, listen, it
[Guest]: was not even, their tone was not defiant at all, that, you know, my community has done,
[Guest]: my boys cannot do it, even if they do it for the larger, no, no, no, nothing.
[Guest]: They said, basically, they're saying these are misguided youth, okay.
[Guest]: And then they get certain people who are very close to the colonial rulers to come and speak
[Guest]: to them, and be there, kind of negotiate on their behalf.
[Guest]: And the Kolkata Samachar, for the after that is constantly talking about how law abiding
[Guest]: they are.
[Guest]: They have nothing to do with all this.
[Guest]: And as you said, just do your commerce, that they didn't want interrupted at all, which
[Guest]: road arms, if you actually look at the original records, which is there in the sixth volume,
[Guest]: which West Bengal government brought out, it's like they were really trying to get after
[Guest]: them.
[Guest]: But it got hushed, only he and then the gentleman who later became a member of Rajya Sabha,
[Guest]: Prabhu Dayal Himmat Singh and few others got arrested, their lives.
[Guest]: So there was a rancor among some of these Marwadis that Birla got away, we still had
[Guest]: to face punishment, spend time in jail.
[Amit Varma]: No, I mean, Himmat Singh was a post-independence minister, you know.
[Guest]: Minister.
[Guest]: Himmat Singh became one of the top notch lawyers in the country.
[Guest]: So yes, that was basically keep away from all this, from whatever is happening.
[Amit Varma]: And this is, you know, also interesting because Poddar, you know, before this, he got very
[Amit Varma]: influenced by the extremists within the Congress party, as you point out, Bipin Chandra Pal
[Amit Varma]: and so on.
[Amit Varma]: And he also simultaneously and later on in time and through the years, this became a
[Amit Varma]: love-hate relationship, but got extremely close to Gandhi, very close to Gandhi.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll discuss that as well in the second half, it's really, that relationship is fascinating.
[Amit Varma]: But what seems to me is that after this Roda thing happens and they are let off, he pretty
[Amit Varma]: much decides that I'm going to stay away from politics and the Gita Press is really a cultural
[Amit Varma]: thing.
[Amit Varma]: But at the same time, it's a political project which is happening under the surface.
[Guest]: And which he makes, his very first editorial of Kalyan in 1926, it's a fascinating, which
[Guest]: is a kind of a template from which Gita Press has not wavered at all, where he talks of
[Guest]: everything, where he talks about what is happening all over the world, he's talking about what
[Guest]: is Hindu-Muslim unity, he's talking about what we should do to...
[Guest]: And mostly it doesn't become, it doesn't have anti-colonial language.
[Guest]: It's mostly about the community.
[Guest]: It's mostly about the religion and Muslims, of course.
[Guest]: And then he says that, you know, we should learn from Muslims to be together and fight
[Guest]: together.
[Guest]: And then he says, he uses the word Sangbal, which is unity of strength.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, at different points in time, he almost sort of cozy's up to the British.
[Amit Varma]: For example, when George V dies in 1926, you know, again, quoting from your book, his death
[Amit Varma]: in 1926 came at a time when Kalyan was still finding its feet and for a journal that counted
[Amit Varma]: Hindu nationalism as a scenic one of the freedom movement, paying tribute to King George V
[Amit Varma]: was possibly a calculated act to win the goodwill of the colonial government.
[Amit Varma]: Poddar called George V an ideal husband, father, son, and friend, and justified the gloom his
[Amit Varma]: death had brought to his subjects, family, and friends.
[Unknown]: How would he know George V was an ideal father?
[Unknown]: That was a...
[Unknown]: Yeah.
[Unknown]: Randomly...
[Unknown]: Kuch bhi bolte the.
[Unknown]: Kuch bhi bolte.
[Amit Varma]: Do whatever to please them.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, and as a project gets underway, I mean, you write about how gradually the
[Amit Varma]: early issues of Kalyan are sort of a testing ground for what become leet motifs and dominant
[Amit Varma]: themes later, like cow slaughter and gender and so on, which we'll discuss as we go along.
[Amit Varma]: But I was particularly struck by how, even though the Gita Press and Kalyan was, you'd
[Amit Varma]: put it in the philanthropic box of the Marwaris that they are not doing this for profit.
[Amit Varma]: This doesn't mean dhando.
[Amit Varma]: Nevertheless, you described that the model of Hinduism they sell is almost a Baniya model
[Amit Varma]: in your words.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: Baniya model...
[Guest]: See, they had to make religion attractive.
[Guest]: One of the ways in which they started right in the beginning, and which in a way played
[Guest]: a big role, and continues to in fact, is that selling you recite God's name for 20, 50,000
[Guest]: times, or you write in a notebook and submit to us, they had the Ramayana Bank and all
[Guest]: that.
[Guest]: And then they had this Ram Nam, Jab Bibhag, and then similar thing for something for Gita.
[Guest]: So it immediately struck a chord among people, among the literate people, that, okay, I know
[Guest]: people who even now are doing it, sending the notebooks full of Ram, Ram, Ram, Ram,
[Guest]: and they're sending it and they're saying, okay, we've written 100,000 times or...
[Guest]: So it brought God and directly, you know, there's a direct interface with God.
[Guest]: And then they said, then this Bhagwan Mahima Ankh, they brought out of Kalyan, which is
[Guest]: a fascinating issue where everyone is talking about bizarre things have happened because
[Guest]: they believed in God, and they recited the name of the God.
[Guest]: And so many times, or they did this, and it helped someone's daughter's marriage two days
[Guest]: before marriage, someone postman brings 20,000 rupees from somewhere, you know, all kinds
[Guest]: of things.
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost a transactional model of Hinduism.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was a very transactional.
[Guest]: You jump a name enough times, you will get it.
[Guest]: You do it, you will get it.
[Guest]: And they'll say, therefore, the stress on whole rituals, that, you know, if you want
[Guest]: a male child, you have to do this, you know, if you want to do that, you have to have fast
[Guest]: in the first hour of on certain day.
[Guest]: And so, and you find that this is even now Kalyan has a full page, which says in the
[Guest]: coming month, the next month, what will be the celestial positions of and what can you
[Guest]: do and which is and there are every day some Purnima or some Ekadasi or some Dwadasi, if
[Guest]: you go by it, and people are following if I have seen women in Gorakhpur, who are kind
[Guest]: of doing it all the time, and even outside Gorakhpur, you know, you know, women who are
[Amit Varma]: doing it.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, I was also, you know, going to discuss a sort of the strategic genius of Poddar and
[Amit Varma]: the various things they did about outreach, which include the Gita Sabhas, Ramayana Sabhas,
[Amit Varma]: Gita tests for children, where they would give prizes and medals for kids, and the Gita
[Amit Varma]: Society and what you're talking about this transactional model and these rituals that
[Amit Varma]: you perform again, I'll quote from your book, because I just found this an incredibly fascinating
[Amit Varma]: and jaw dropping quote, or stop quote, four kinds of membership were on offer for the
[Amit Varma]: Gita department.
[Amit Varma]: The first included those who read the entire Gita 18 chapters once every day, 365 times
[Amit Varma]: in a year.
[Amit Varma]: The second type of members could finish all the chapters over two days, and the complete
[Amit Varma]: text 180 times in a year.
[Amit Varma]: The third category of members read six chapters in a day, thus reading the Gita 120 times
[Amit Varma]: in a year.
[Amit Varma]: The last category of members could reach as much of the Gita as they wish daily, as long
[Amit Varma]: as they completed at least 42 readings in a year, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's fascinating, you don't need to live a virtuous life, you don't need to just read
[Amit Varma]: it and your job is done, you know.
[Amit Varma]: We'll now take a quick break.
[Amit Varma]: And we'll come back after the commercial break to get really into the meat of what the Gita
[Amit Varma]: press was all about and what the Sanatan Dharm Hindu movement was attempting to do.
[Unknown]: Hello, everybody, welcome to another awesome week on the IBM podcast network.
[Unknown]: If you are not following us on social media, please make sure you do.
[Unknown]: We're IBM podcast on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram.
[Unknown]: Instagram was a big week for us this week, we crossed 10,000 followers.
[Unknown]: Also, you should check out the kind of stuff that we do over there.
[Unknown]: Take a look into the studio and you know, I mean, like see some of the quotes and stuff
[Unknown]: like that that come out and audiograms and, you know, all that other kind of good stuff.
[Unknown]: So you know, let me tell you about two new shows that are coming up, right?
[Unknown]: So the first one let me talk to you about is GAYBCD.
[Unknown]: This show is hosted by Farhad and Sunetru.
[Unknown]: They share the ABCDs of their queer lives and dig into the memories and experiences.
[Unknown]: Tune in for a new episode every week on Tuesdays.
[Unknown]: Another show we're really excited to bring you is called Feeding 10 Billion.
[Unknown]: This show is hosted by Good Food Institute's Varun Deshpande and Ramya Ramamurthy.
[Unknown]: They talk to experts in the food industry about rethinking protein and reimagining food
[Unknown]: systems in India.
[Unknown]: New episodes out every Tuesday for the show as well.
[Unknown]: Also, Simplified is completing 150 episodes.
[Unknown]: My God, I can't believe that we're already there.
[Unknown]: They need your help to celebrate this milestone.
[Unknown]: Send us theories, concepts or questions that you have using the hashtag Simplified150 on
[Unknown]: Twitter or send us a DM on Instagram and Chuck, Nareen and Srikanth will answer your questions
[Unknown]: on episode 150.
[Unknown]: On Cyrus Says, Cyrus is joined by Rajiv Lakshman of Raghuraji from Rohdi's fame.
[Unknown]: He shares childhood stories of growing up with a twin brother, his memories of Cyrus
[Unknown]: at MTV and his new show Skulls and Roses.
[Unknown]: The Gana Tantra podcast was back from a hiatus with a warm-up episode.
[Unknown]: Saryu and Alok discuss themes that you can look forward to in season 2.
[Unknown]: On What A Player, Akash, Mikhail and Siddharth talk about the Bangladesh-Zimbabwe tri-series,
[Unknown]: Monty Panesar is the next mayor of London, the physical requirements for playing chess
[Unknown]: and a lot more.
[Unknown]: On Tech Careers in the News, Shiladitya is joined by Kaushik Vijayaraghavan and Aditi
[Unknown]: Kulkarni to talk about intelligent automation and its impact on the real world.
[Unknown]: On Agla Station Adulthood, Ritasha and Ayushi dive into romantic relationships and the complexities
[Unknown]: that they entail.
[Unknown]: On Keeping It Queer, Farhad and Naveen talk to performance artist Swapnil Alize about
[Unknown]: accepting her identity, her love for dance and her group Color Positive.
[Unknown]: On our Kannada podcast, Thaliharate, Narahari KS joins Ganeshan Pawan to share an overview
[Unknown]: of public relations in India and how it is involved.
[Unknown]: And with that, let's get you on with your show.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to The Scene and The Unseen.
[Amit Varma]: I'm chatting with Akshay Mukul, writer of the brilliant book, The Gita Press and The
[Amit Varma]: Making of Hindu India.
[Amit Varma]: Let's kind of go through the different sort of dominant themes that the Gita Press took
[Amit Varma]: up.
[Amit Varma]: Some of them resonate to this day.
[Amit Varma]: And one of them is a cow.
[Amit Varma]: So you know, and people today seem to think that this is a recent thing.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, to a certain extent, you know, because, for example, cow slaughter would
[Amit Varma]: mainly have Muslims and Dalits involved in it, the whole movement almost seems as a proxy
[Amit Varma]: to just attack those guys.
[Amit Varma]: But it goes a lot deeper than that, doesn't it?
[Guest]: It is.
[Guest]: In fact, cow and women have been, I don't think there's been a single issue of Kalyan
[Guest]: where these two virtues of cow and the need to keep the sanctity of Hindu women is not
[Guest]: discussed in one way or the other.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, there's a sentence that I remember from your book where you write about how you
[Amit Varma]: quote someone saying wars have been fought over cows and women.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: And cow was, because cow was a rallying point for them.
[Guest]: Cow, they realized, would help them tide over the deep caste divisions, which the Hindus
[Guest]: had.
[Guest]: It would help them talk of, not talk of other things.
[Guest]: And mind you, when this Gaurakshini Sabha started and the violence started in the name
[Guest]: of cow, Marwaris were bankrolling, but who were the foot soldiers?
[Guest]: Those soldiers were people like, the communities like Yadavs and Kurmis.
[Guest]: In fact, if you see in a place like Bihar, some of the riots that took place around that
[Guest]: period, most of the perpetrators, Hindu perpetrators were the Yadavs.
[Guest]: So it created a kind of, and cow became a very easy symbol for them.
[Guest]: And only when you find, only in the 90s or late 80s, early 90s, after the Mandal happened,
[Guest]: that we find for some time that cow, although the cow movement has been constant, it has
[Guest]: been going on, but we find that the Ram temple or something came as a rallying point, but
[Guest]: otherwise cow has been constant.
[Guest]: In fact, when 2014, these people came to power, Kalyan talked in detail about, and then Maharashtra
[Guest]: government banned it.
[Guest]: One of the earliest states in 2014 to do it.
[Guest]: They were very happy.
[Guest]: They said, now it should be done across India.
[Guest]: It should be banned across India and there's this whole thing.
[Guest]: Why only few states are doing it?
[Guest]: So it was since 1951 election also, every election when they tell readers who to vote,
[Guest]: they don't mention a party.
[Guest]: They only say that just vote for a party which will do these, you know, one, two, three things.
[Guest]: So this has been a very, very, cow has been the most important symbol or the most sacred
[Guest]: of things on which they have kind of worked and Gita Press has a big role to play also
[Guest]: because the cross linkages that Gita Press created among other groups, there were a lot
[Guest]: of other groups exclusively working for cow, cow protection and other things.
[Guest]: And that famous, the 60s, the cow protection movement, which led to attack on parliament,
[Guest]: actually Poddar was at the helm of it.
[Guest]: He was a treasurer for a long time.
[Guest]: And Gita, Kalyan was kind of, if you see Kalyan of that time, it was spewing venom.
[Amit Varma]: And as you pointed out, they had two special issues on cow.
[Guest]: One was a cow ankh, which was later on, which happened in the, much later, it was kind of.
[Amit Varma]: And I was trying to figure out why is the cow sacred to Hinduism and you quote Peter
[Amit Varma]: Vandermeer in your book, where again, I'll quote from your book, Peter Vandermeer asked
[Amit Varma]: the question, why would people want to die and kill for the protection of cow?
[Amit Varma]: He looks at the centrality of the cow at four levels.
[Amit Varma]: One in Brahmanical rituals, a cow is akin to mother or symbol of the earth, the nourisher,
[Amit Varma]: goddess who fulfills every wish, symbol of wealth and good fortune, Lakshmi, who is integral
[Amit Varma]: to ritual, blah, blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: Two, sacredness is also attached to cow products like milk, dung, and urine.
[Amit Varma]: Consumption of milk, butter, and ghee is believed to make a person sattvic and a mixture of
[Amit Varma]: five cow products, milk, curd, butter, urine, and dung is used to prepare the panchgavya
[Amit Varma]: that is used to purify a polluted person, parenthesis, it was offered as a solution
[Amit Varma]: for Hindu women who had lost their modesty during the communal riots at the time of partition.
[Amit Varma]: And we stop parenthesis and we'll come back to this when we talk about gender.
[Amit Varma]: Three, the symbol of cow as a wish-fulfilling mother of Krishna is celebrated in the bhakti
[Amit Varma]: cult.
[Amit Varma]: And finally, Gau Mata was symbolic of both family and community, protecting the cow meant
[Amit Varma]: reiterating the patriarchal authority like the kingdom of Rama, which is the Ram Rajya,
[Amit Varma]: the ideal Hindu state, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that once we gain independence and India sort of goes in a different direction,
[Amit Varma]: you also talk about how cow protection arguments begin to be framed in secular terms, such
[Amit Varma]: as, you know, where you, for example, how they talk about the cow's high economic utility,
[Amit Varma]: they talk about the relationship between the quality of cattle in general prosperity.
[Amit Varma]: You talk about how national pride is associated with economic prosperity, which is brought
[Amit Varma]: about by cows.
[Amit Varma]: And also about how the cow can cement harmonious relationships between Hindus and Muslims.
[Guest]: See some of these people had they been alive and seen what was happening now, what is happening
[Guest]: now in the name of cow, I'm sure they wouldn't have approved of it.
[Guest]: Because whatever they were doing, they were very clear that, you know, the cow is alive,
[Guest]: how do you get rid of the cow, which is old, ailing and died on its own?
[Guest]: Okay, nobody, even if you're not selling it to a slaughterhouse, everyone knew what was
[Guest]: happening to cow.
[Guest]: But they knew the skin was being used, the body parts or whatever, you know, various
[Guest]: ways it's being used, and they were aware of the economic aspect of the whole thing.
[Guest]: Even Rajendra Prasad, when he's writing in Goa, he's talking about it.
[Guest]: And he's saying that, let them die on their own, or don't give to slaughterhouse.
[Guest]: And they're constantly they'll invoke example of Saudi Arabia or one of these countries
[Guest]: and they'll say, oh, cows are not slaughtered even there.
[Guest]: And the example of Humayun or Bawar, one of these.
[Guest]: Now what is happening?
[Guest]: I don't think the killing, I don't know whether they're approving or maybe if I had this kind
[Guest]: of, I had, you know, the kind of government we have now, the full Hindu government been
[Guest]: in power, maybe it would have happened, one doesn't know.
[Guest]: But that generation was aware of that there has to be some, you know, resolution to this
[Guest]: whole cow thing.
[Guest]: When a cow is giving me milk, helping me in various ways, at the end of it, what to do
[Guest]: with cow, old ailing cow, can a farmer afford five old ailing cow and have new ones also?
[Guest]: Impossible.
[Guest]: So there was a way and they were aware of it, what was happening, otherwise, how a slaughterhouse
[Guest]: is working and how were Hindus running the slaughterhouses.
[Guest]: And in some of these areas where this movement was very, very strong, Western UP and other
[Guest]: places, I know in Maharashtra, for instance, although these Podar and all worked very kind
[Guest]: of actively to close many slaughterhouses, in Bombay, they had this huge slaughterhouse
[Guest]: which got closed in those days, I think in the 50s, in Bengal, they got certain slaughterhouses
[Guest]: closed.
[Guest]: But they had some model that, you know, you do, you have a pasture land, you do this,
[Guest]: at least that's what they talk.
[Guest]: Since they were never in power in those days, one doesn't know how it would have kind of
[Guest]: panned out, but I don't know whether they were approved or what is happening now.
[Amit Varma]: No, and some of the sort of narratives that came up around the cow seem quite goofy.
[Amit Varma]: For example, you quote someone called Prabhudhat Dhramacharya, who prescribed a tenfold path
[Amit Varma]: for Hindus and Hindutva to survive.
[Amit Varma]: And quoting you, quote, he asked Hindus to keep cows at home, even if this meant they
[Amit Varma]: had to have fewer motor vehicles.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, stop quoting, try telling a modern bhakta dad, but the funniest thing that I found was
[Amit Varma]: a Vanaspati controversy.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, Vanaspati.
[Amit Varma]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Unknown]: See, Vanaspati, this is a vegetable oil which sort of replaced ghee as a cooking medium.
[Guest]: So there was this, you know, there's this famous Jain Vanaspati case, which happened
[Guest]: sometime in the 80s, this news, I think, broken by a journalist, I think Manoj Mitta played
[Guest]: a big role in it, where this whole beef tallow, which was being used, and some of the Marwadis
[Guest]: were involved, this class, this community was involved.
[Guest]: And when the time when they're getting very involved with it, you find that Gita Press
[Guest]: suddenly turns very business, it's like a business weekly, monthly, where they even
[Guest]: listing out early days, they were talking of making this distinction between the companies
[Guest]: which use beef tallow and not beef tallow, this is what the controversy that I'm talking
[Guest]: about happened much later.
[Guest]: And they listed out the companies, which were mostly the Marwadi owned companies, which
[Amit Varma]: were
[Amit Varma]: In fact, the first one was Gita Press.
[Guest]: Later on, they had to leave this business, they abandoned this business, because something
[Guest]: happened, something very controversial, which they will not talk about.
[Guest]: So when it came to, you know, their business, they use Gita Press to the hilt, especially
[Guest]: in when in a crisis like this Vanaspati ghee controversy.
[Guest]: So it was used by them.
[Guest]: In fact, and then they what they did also on Vanaspati, or controversy, they got more
[Guest]: and more people to write on it, you know, and when it suited, they used Gandhi, you
[Amit Varma]: know.
[Amit Varma]: So in fact, there's again, a quote from your book where Gandhi summarizes an article by
[Unknown]: Dattar Singh, who is Gandhi's grandfather.
[Amit Varma]: And he was also a prominent, he was a cow consultant for the government.
[Amit Varma]: And quoting again from your book, quote, Gandhi summarized Singh's article for wider dissemination.
[Amit Varma]: Vanaspati, he said, is a poor substitute for ghee, but due to the great margin of profit
[Amit Varma]: in this industry, its production has developed from 26,000 tons per annum in 1937 to 105,000
[Amit Varma]: tons in 1943.
[Amit Varma]: Such rapid growth of the Vanaspati industry, Gandhi feared, will not only adversely affect
[Amit Varma]: the welfare of the cultivators, but will have a deleterious effect on the cattle industry
[Amit Varma]: upon which the prosperity of the whole nation directly depends, and it almost sounds like
[Amit Varma]: Basia Scandal Maker's petition that, you know, block out the South.
[Amit Varma]: And another interesting thing that I didn't know about, though, I consider myself fairly
[Amit Varma]: well informed on Indian politics was the whole sort of the cow slaughter agitations of the
[Amit Varma]: 60s, which came to a head as you point out on 7 November 1966, where Delhi witnessed
[Amit Varma]: a surge of people estimated between 125,000 and 700,000.
[Amit Varma]: And among the people who addressed the crowd in front of Parliament were people like Golwalkar,
[Amit Varma]: Karpatri Maharaj, Prabhudad Brahmachari, Seth Govindas of the Congress, Atal Bihari Vajpayee
[Guest]: and Hanuman Prasad Puldhar.
[Guest]: Hanuman Prasad Puldhar was actually the treasurer of that, Goraksha Mahaviyan Samiti.
[Guest]: He was a very, very important person, in fact.
[Guest]: I also mentioned somewhere, I think here only when I talk about cow, how RSS Kader, he's
[Guest]: thanking Golwalkar saying that how your Kader helped our people train and all that, because
[Guest]: of this whole violence which happened and the way they attacked the city, especially
[Guest]: this Lutyens Delhi got really attacked, Kamaraj's house got vandalized.
[Amit Varma]: Some of his staff got beaten up, and they would always play the victim.
[Guest]: So even every time there was a riot, they would be like, oh, the Muslims started it.
[Guest]: Even in this they played victim, but for a change with Indira Gandhi, they were like,
[Guest]: for some time they were really, they didn't know that this is the kind of actions she's
[Guest]: going to take.
[Guest]: She didn't know that a lot of people who were arrested and in Tihar jail will get beaten
[Guest]: up.
[Guest]: So either police did it or fellow prisoners were asked to beat them up, which is a normal
[Guest]: practice in jails, in Indian jails.
[Guest]: That kind of really rattled them.
[Guest]: They never thought that this will go on for so long.
[Guest]: So you find this almost what they were doing during the national movement or later during
[Guest]: emergency, very apologetic tone.
[Guest]: They're almost writing to Indira Gandhi saying that, addressing her sister, that no, we didn't
[Guest]: do this, we got, you got it wrong.
[Guest]: And the movement completely disappears.
[Guest]: And because the government created its own kind of committee and said, we are doing this
[Guest]: and they got somehow trapped into this.
[Guest]: So the movement more or less dies in the aftermath of that much later again.
[Guest]: And therefore you find there is a period of lull on cow movement, although these groups
[Guest]: were constantly working and if you go to places like Rishikesh, Vrindavan, Mathura, Banaras,
[Guest]: you find these groups existed, but they'd lost that, although Gita Press continued to
[Guest]: talk about it.
[Guest]: Gita Press in its journal will talk and all that.
[Amit Varma]: So, you know, so just kind of thinking about that, like you said that in politics, the
[Amit Varma]: cow issue waxed and waned and, you know, now it's back, of course, but Gita Press kept
[Amit Varma]: talking about it throughout.
[Amit Varma]: Was it something like, did they genuinely expect cow slaughter to at some point in time
[Amit Varma]: be banned across the country, or was it more of a rhetorical tool to mobilize Hindus?
[Guest]: Both, because then they could also see that even post, immediately after independence,
[Guest]: you see what was happening in UP, UP had agreed.
[Guest]: So they could see even the ambivalence of the Congress government, so the Congress leaders
[Guest]: on cows.
[Guest]: Although how else was Govind Das addressing, who was Congress leader, he never left Congress
[Guest]: till he was, he was, I think, till before that, he was a member of CWC.
[Guest]: If you, this one, Lal Bahadur Shastri, well, Lal Bahadur Shastri didn't come out in the
[Guest]: open, but Gulzari Lal Nanda quit and came in support of the movement.
[Guest]: So Congress's ambivalence, they figured out, and it's also, you know, the cultural thing
[Guest]: among Hindus.
[Guest]: So very few people could make that distinction on cow which Nehru's Western upbringing, Nehru's
[Guest]: refined man, refined thinking, he could make that distinction that don't do this, you'll
[Guest]: destroy our economy.
[Guest]: And he just kept it economy, nothing else.
[Amit Varma]: In fact, people who talked about the cow, he called them economically illiterate.
[Guest]: He was absolutely right, he made some big mistakes himself.
[Guest]: But he was right about this.
[Guest]: When you read that speech he gave in Parliament, when the private member bill is moved, and
[Guest]: he appears in that day in Parliament, and he says, what are you two people doing?
[Guest]: And so he could understand he, and he never got into this religion mumbo-jumbo, religious
[Guest]: mumbo-jumbo.
[Guest]: He said, let's keep it to economics.
[Guest]: If you don't guys don't understand, you people talk of rural economy.
[Guest]: Do you realize what this, what will do to our rural economy?
[Guest]: But then, so partly it was that the right wing figured out that cow is something on
[Guest]: which very few parties will have the guts to come and Nehru is gone, Nehru is dead and
[Guest]: gone.
[Guest]: And so Congress after Nehru, if you see, it's been a kind of, its ambivalence continues
[Guest]: till now on certain issues on cow, or be it anything, even in Parliament, just to see
[Guest]: on certain bills, Congress could have easily come out and kind of opposed it.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, they run states where there are cow protection cells in the Parliament and so
[Guest]: on.
[Guest]: Yeah, look, what's happening in Madhya Pradesh or even Rajasthan instances have happened.
[Guest]: So Congress has always been a lesser evil in these matters and various other things,
[Guest]: of course, are the bigger evils.
[Guest]: So and of course, it becomes a very easy rallying.
[Guest]: It helps you paper over the large differences within the Hindu society of caste and everything.
[Guest]: Cow is something on which very few people will, you know, then you only talk of cow
[Guest]: for Hindus.
[Guest]: You're not talking of other things like temple entry movement, every time you talk, it reveals
[Guest]: the great divide in the Hindi among Hindus.
[Amit Varma]: Cow doesn't.
[Amit Varma]: Let's talk about caste, since you brought it up and, you know, very early on, Poddar
[Amit Varma]: sort of, you know, he supports Varnashram.
[Amit Varma]: And okay, so before we get to caste, there's sort of a broader question, that in terms
[Amit Varma]: of their beliefs and caste, in terms of their beliefs in gender, and in both cases, beliefs
[Amit Varma]: basically boil down to, you should know your place.
[Amit Varma]: So within a caste system, this is a Varnashram, this is everybody's place.
[Amit Varma]: If you're a woman, this is your place, and we'll discuss that in detail at some point.
[Amit Varma]: And it all goes back to the whole karma thing that you are where you are, because of the
[Amit Varma]: misdeeds of your past birth.
[Amit Varma]: And therefore, there's no need to change it.
[Guest]: This is your karma playing itself out.
[Guest]: Do something well in this life and next life, maybe you will be born upper caste.
[Unknown]: In the long run, we are not going to be born upper caste.
[Guest]: So caste was very, very crucial to them.
[Guest]: In fact, therefore, you find, right from the beginning, even early days in the first few
[Guest]: issues of Kalyan also, they're talking of basically, this Chaturvarna system, the Varnashram,
[Guest]: and this is what it is.
[Guest]: But only after 1932, once the Poonam Pact gets signed, is when they're really agitated.
[Guest]: And the first rupture in relations with Gandhi takes place, then how could you?
[Guest]: And then he's kind of showing him his old articles, citing old articles of Gandhi to
[Guest]: Gandhi and saying that, look what you wrote.
[Guest]: But Gandhi is, the good thing about Gandhi was he was constantly evolving, admitting
[Guest]: his mistakes, he's saying, yes, I did.
[Guest]: So what?
[Guest]: I moved on.
[Guest]: This is what I think, which they could never kind of come to terms with.
[Guest]: And after that, the stress on caste becomes more pronounced in Kalyan and other places.
[Guest]: And they're constantly, go to the extent of saying that, you know, just because you carry,
[Guest]: you know, the, this whole scavengers, because of what you do, you have germs in your body.
[Guest]: Imagine saying this and getting away with it, writing it and getting away with it, kind
[Guest]: of terms they use for Ambedkar.
[Guest]: And because they were very worried, they were very angry with what he was doing with Hindu
[Guest]: code bill, Ambedkar.
[Guest]: And on top of that, second, he had married a Brahmin woman, that kind of got the code.
[Amit Varma]: In your book, you've spoken about how they always called him Hinvarna, lower caste.
[Guest]: Imagine addressing Hinvarna, Dr. Ambedkar, they were very, very angry with Ambedkar.
[Guest]: In fact, see Nehru, they could still think he's one among us who's gone, you know, off
[Guest]: track.
[Guest]: But this man?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And in a similar sense, something that reminded me of what even Modi does today is that when
[Amit Varma]: it comes to Muslims, he'll refer to Mian Jinnah and Mian Liaqat, and you have Modi doing his
[Unknown]: Mian Musharraf a decade ago.
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: So this is just showing them their place and constantly talking about it.
[Guest]: They were so worried when he was contesting from two constituencies in Bombay, that what
[Guest]: if he wins?
[Guest]: And they could never forgive him for what he did to, because of the Hindu code bill.
[Guest]: If he resigns, and Nehru was also not giving up on Hindu code bill, broke it, but got it
[Guest]: passed.
[Amit Varma]: And these guys didn't know what to do with him.
[Amit Varma]: So we will come to the Hindu code bill later.
[Amit Varma]: I found, you know, one of the letters from Poddar to Gandhi, you sort of reproduce was
[Amit Varma]: very fascinating, where Poddar is writing to Gandhi, quote, these days a big agitation
[Amit Varma]: by Dalits is going on in the country that has intensified due to your fast.
[Amit Varma]: At various places, people are dining with Dalits, and they're being allowed inside temples.
[Amit Varma]: Some only God knows.
[Amit Varma]: Just like those believing in God and Shastras are accused of blind faith, I find that this
[Amit Varma]: movement has not only become a victim of blind faith, but also there is a lack of discernment.
[Amit Varma]: Even those in favor of dining with Dalits agree, though I do not equate dining with
[Amit Varma]: them as a mark of equality, that they cannot be considered pure unless they have a pure
[Amit Varma]: bath, wear fresh clothes, give up alcohol and meat, and at least stop feasting on dead
[Amit Varma]: cattle.
[Amit Varma]: Only then co-dining makes sense.
[Amit Varma]: But your common dining in temple entry movement is not even checking if they fulfill those
[Amit Varma]: norms.
[Amit Varma]: And so on, he goes off, ranting on and on.
[Amit Varma]: And in the end, he says, even Pandavas and Kauravas used to dine together, but it led
[Amit Varma]: to a big battle.
[Amit Varma]: And it seems as if, you know, on some of these issues, like Dalits and Muslims and cows,
[Amit Varma]: he almost gets unhinged.
[Guest]: Unhinged.
[Guest]: And then you realize that, okay, wasn't this journal supposed to be Bhakti Gyan Vairag
[Guest]: Journal, which will talk about bhakti and knowledge and renunciation.
[Guest]: Look at this man, he's just, and something would happen.
[Guest]: Then like one marriage, Gandhi had made this, made some announcement that he'll only attend
[Guest]: marriages where at least one partner is, you know, from Dalit community, he's a Harijan.
[Guest]: And this comes to Poddar's notice, he says, he's like almost abusive.
[Guest]: He said he's lost his mental balance.
[Guest]: But then at the same time, it's very difficult to figure out this, around the same time you
[Guest]: find there's a letter, which come to him from Jamnalal Bajaj, saying that, oh, Bapu wants
[Guest]: you to be part of some journal, which was bring out on again on cows or something.
[Guest]: So he says, Bapu ke pyaar se mahatma ka kya lena dena, something he says, makes that distinction
[Guest]: that you're a mahatma for the world, and you do all those things, which I don't approve
[Guest]: of, but you're my Bapu.
[Guest]: So at personal level, yeah, I relate to you, okay, fine.
[Guest]: But yeah, 32 kind of gave them this, they just couldn't figure out what has happened
[Guest]: to the world, you know, why people are going on and on talking about this.
[Amit Varma]: That's very interesting.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, the whole this is almost I mean, forgive me if that sounds kind of sacrilegious, but
[Amit Varma]: this whole journey of Gandhi on caste also is kind of funny, where it seems to me that
[Amit Varma]: okay, at one point, he talks about Varnashram and how the caste have their place and basically
[Amit Varma]: says the same kind of thing Poddar would have utterly agreed with.
[Amit Varma]: And then he goes to this other side, where he says that no, no, we need to dine together
[Amit Varma]: and all of that.
[Amit Varma]: But to me, it seems like if you go by some of his actions, he's still posturing a bit
[Amit Varma]: and Ambedkar kind of sees through it and the Ambedkar Gandhi debates are...
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, therefore they never, Ambedkar, see, even the pact was a bit of a compromise
[Guest]: and Ambedkar is always suspicious of him throughout.
[Guest]: It's not that the relationship ever is very, very, you know, the kind of relations that
[Guest]: Gandhi had with Nehru or something, no, he and they were all with it, they inhabited
[Guest]: different universes.
[Guest]: It was a very, very momentary thing what happened in the Puri Pact and all that.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And so Gandhi was, in a sense, it almost feels like Needa Ghar Ka Na Ghat Ka, that he's lost
[Amit Varma]: the Sangeeta Press and he's lost Ambedkar and he's basically in all his posturing in
[Guest]: the games.
[Guest]: Gandhi always had enough to move on, Gandhi didn't care much about these small things
[Amit Varma]: of what Poddar thought or what Ambedkar was doing.
[Amit Varma]: And the most fascinating parts of your book are parts which actually deal with gender.
[Amit Varma]: And the remarkable thing is how you point out that even till today, they have those
[Amit Varma]: same kind of incredibly regressive views.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just going to quote a bit.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, I mean, their fundamental sort of belief is again, quoting from your book, quote, independence
[Amit Varma]: is not promised to women in the Hindu social structure, a woman has to live with a father
[Amit Varma]: till marriage, with a husband as a married woman, and after his demise, she has to live
[Amit Varma]: either with a son or some other relative.
[Amit Varma]: She cannot be independent at any cost.
[Amit Varma]: And a little later while talking about menstruation, Poddar writes, I'll quote from your book again,
[Amit Varma]: presenting a skewed understanding of female sexuality, Poddar wrote that during her menstrual
[Amit Varma]: period, a woman had an uncontrollable urge for sex.
[Amit Varma]: And to channelize this vasana, there is a system of vasana, a sexual urge, there is
[Amit Varma]: a system of marrying girls by the time they attain puberty.
[Amit Varma]: In the husband's shelter, a woman's sexual desire does not reach others and she is safe
[Amit Varma]: from getting polluted.
[Amit Varma]: If she is not married, her sexual desire degenerates into debauchery, just the way it is happening
[Amit Varma]: in Europe.
[Amit Varma]: The core job of a woman was to serve the world.
[Amit Varma]: How?
[Amit Varma]: Poddar used two terms, utpadan, which means manufacturing or production, and nirman, which
[Amit Varma]: means construction or creation.
[Amit Varma]: Thus, a woman's job was to procreate and nurture quality men, stop quote.
[Guest]: You know, when I was actually writing this part, my niece was, my daughter was very small,
[Guest]: she was in I think, she was still in class seventh or something.
[Guest]: So I made her read it.
[Guest]: I said, What do you think of this?
[Guest]: I made them read that pamphlet as what do you think of it?
[Guest]: I made my niece who's elder and who's in engineering college, so I better read it.
[Guest]: Is this what you're writing?
[Guest]: So they were not very sure what what I have to do with that.
[Guest]: So I said, Well, this is what it is and still being sold.
[Guest]: See, Isthri Dharam Prasanthi, the last one when the my Hindi translation was being done
[Guest]: and I lost my own copy, I picked it up from railway, I had gone to drop some on the railway
[Guest]: streets and I got it.
[Guest]: And just look at the circulation, it's something produced in 1926, getting sold in 2019, has
[Guest]: a constituency, has a readership, selling more than Chetan Bhagat, then what is happening?
[Guest]: Someone somewhere is reading it, and even 10%, I don't know what percentage, I have
[Guest]: no figures, but someone is getting influenced too.
[Guest]: So what is happening when you see this strange kind of things happening outside the urban
[Guest]: spaces, you realize that people are getting influenced what is being done to women in
[Guest]: terms of just controlling their sexuality, basically control, you know, using whatever
[Guest]: be the absurd logic.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Basically, the whole deal is that a woman's only job is to make her husband look good
[Amit Varma]: to the world and to serve him.
[Guest]: You inhabit the inner space, the four walls of the house, and just procreate.
[Guest]: That's it.
[Amit Varma]: You have no other job.
[Amit Varma]: And you know, in this context, one of the things I noticed in your book, though you
[Amit Varma]: don't always call it out as such, but it's, is that what Kalyan is also doing, what Padar
[Amit Varma]: is doing is a lot of what today we would call fake news.
[Amit Varma]: They are just randomly and I found a few examples of these, and like in one place, you say,
[Amit Varma]: quote, Padar cited a Labour MP speech in the British Parliament in which he reportedly
[Amit Varma]: said 40% of girls under 20 got pregnant before marriage.
[Amit Varma]: And among married women, the first child was illegitimate in 25% of the cases, which is
[Unknown]: complete rubbish.
[Amit Varma]: And there was a similar thing from Lahore about how all the girls over 12 are pregnant.
[Amit Varma]: You know, and one that is not, and okay, but another one, Padar claimed without substantiation
[Amit Varma]: that sexually transmitted diseases were prevalent among 50% of students.
[Amit Varma]: And another one, which is not related to gender, but I found it so funny was, quote, one of
[Amit Varma]: Gandhi's associates telling people in Gujarat that cow fat was mixed in the manufacture
[Amit Varma]: of foreign cloth, or a leaflet stating that 1000 pounds of coloured Manchester cloth consisted
[Amit Varma]: of 300 pounds of cow and big blood, stop quote.
[Guest]: This is how they propagate it.
[Guest]: No, no substantiation, nobody will ask, someone will print it.
[Guest]: So we are now worried about fake news from social media, which is still your print is
[Guest]: still more or less still all right, you know.
[Amit Varma]: And then it was happening in print, you know, and it was everyone was doing the most popular
[Amit Varma]: Heartland magazine, reaching everyone.
[Guest]: And you don't have any Pratik Sinha or Alt News to sort of pass this.
[Guest]: So you randomly are saying Labour MP, who is this Labour MP, then they will quote some
[Guest]: study about something happened to the generation of women, who, what study, which study, they
[Amit Varma]: will never mention it.
[Amit Varma]: And there's other stuff like, for example, at a later point, he's in the 1948 Nariyang
[Amit Varma]: Poddar, sort of glorifies Sati, and his narrative rests on his genuine scientific belief.
[Amit Varma]: When you put scientific in good words, of course, that fire can emanate from a distraught
[Amit Varma]: widow's shoulder and heart.
[Amit Varma]: So he's saying no one sets a woman on fire.
[Amit Varma]: But if she is pativrata and a virtuous woman, her sorrow for her husband will make her spontaneously
[Amit Varma]: combust, which she calls scientific.
[Guest]: And this stuff is just nuts and millions of people are reading it.
[Guest]: Reading it, mind you, Nariyang is still in circulation, Nariyang is very much, it keeps
[Guest]: getting reprinted.
[Guest]: And Nariyang is one of these year end specials, 700 pages.
[Guest]: At the beginning of the year, they have special, which is like 1000 page special.
[Guest]: You have all these?
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, I have.
[Guest]: All of these?
[Guest]: Yeah, I have kept all of it.
[Guest]: I should have asked you to bring one.
[Guest]: Yeah, I have all of Nariyang, Hinduang, everything.
[Amit Varma]: Have all the issues.
[Amit Varma]: And what is the noise to signal ratio?
[Amit Varma]: Like how much of this is this bullshit kind of fake news nonsense and how much is actually
[Guest]: well reasoned stuff?
[Guest]: See, when it comes to women, I'll say 100% is bullshit, of course.
[Guest]: On cow, they were doing both the things.
[Guest]: See, Gosevang comes at a time, for instance, when the movement is at its slowest step.
[Guest]: So it's talking, it is very economic in nature, this is 90s, 93 or something, if I'm getting
[Guest]: the year right.
[Guest]: So by then, the movement was not there, you know, Ram temple movement was at the center
[Guest]: stage.
[Guest]: It has some things, it has a few articles by experts, which is talking of how to make
[Guest]: economic use of cow, which is fine.
[Guest]: You can even sense the change of narrative.
[Guest]: Then it's not a strident.
[Amit Varma]: They're trying to make it sound respectable.
[Guest]: So they made that distinction of Govang, which had already come in the mean Gosevang, where
[Guest]: was the, they were discussing economics of it and various other aspects.
[Guest]: Otherwise, see, they will always throw this Shastras or some Sutras or some slokas or
[Guest]: something, which ordinary reader, I don't know how many of them would understand.
[Guest]: I'm not saying because I myself never cross checked when it came to the religious texts.
[Guest]: So I'm not in a position to comment on that.
[Guest]: But yes, when you claim the scientific study on women or Sati or women burning on their
[Unknown]: own because of some combustion happening inside, it's like, what do you do to that?
[Unknown]: You know, you write, you read, it freaks you out, you know, what do you do with this such
[Amit Varma]: thing, you know?
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And for example, I mean, a lot of their stands to do with gender are crazy, like they were
[Amit Varma]: against birth control.
[Amit Varma]: So again, quoting from your book, quote Poddar saying, encouraging artificial methods is
[Amit Varma]: like encouraging evil artificial methods of birth control.
[Amit Varma]: It makes men and women frivolous.
[Amit Varma]: Artificial methods would result in impotence and decline in sperm count.
[Amit Varma]: This remedy would prove to be worse than the disease.
[Amit Varma]: Elsewhere, he's ranting against cinema and he says, quote, first and foremost, female
[Amit Varma]: actors should be thrown out completely.
[Amit Varma]: They are the root cause of all evil.
[Amit Varma]: And film should not consist of anything that perverts a mind.
[Amit Varma]: There will be hangama at first, but then people will get used to the changes.
[Amit Varma]: Stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And it's interesting that while all this is happening, what Poddar has done and probably
[Amit Varma]: shows his genius as an editor, and you alluded to it earlier, is that he has an extremely
[Amit Varma]: wide cast of contributors to, you know, it's not just a typical Hindu nationalist in the
[Guest]: Hindu community.
[Guest]: No, no, no, no.
[Guest]: You're very, very smart that way.
[Guest]: You know, you have people like Radhakrishnan writing for some issues, Radhakrishnan was
[Guest]: not writing on controversial, he was a philosopher, he kept to that, he didn't get into areas
[Guest]: which he was not.
[Guest]: Gandhi wrote a lot.
[Guest]: Nehru is the only one which, even he got the big Hindi writers to write, you know, Premchand
[Guest]: to Nirala to everyone, and they'll privately say what to do, we don't know anything.
[Guest]: But because of his aura, his charm, whatever it is, even Premchand wrote, Nirala wrote.
[Guest]: I think among that generation of Hindi writers, Mathilisaran Gupt was the only one who wrote
[Guest]: enthusiastically, Hariod maybe, but others were not very keen, someone like Nirala was
[Guest]: too irreverent to get into this.
[Amit Varma]: But then well,
[Amit Varma]: And it's almost like Poddar has like strategically decided that, okay, what do I do to make it
[Amit Varma]: as respectable in this way as possible, one, get all the politicians, two, get all the
[Amit Varma]: Hindi literators, three, get people from other religions, other religions also, and four,
[Guest]: get people from abroad.
[Guest]: So it gained them a lot of respect because of that, you know, and it helped build a huge
[Guest]: network.
[Amit Varma]: And let's move on now to the next theme.
[Amit Varma]: And this is not really a theme as just an underlying backdrop to all of this, which
[Amit Varma]: is their attitudes towards Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, even if they had a few Muslim writers, there's a lot of this constant baiting when
[Amit Varma]: Jinnah is mentioned as Mian Jinnah, when Liaqat is mentioned.
[Amit Varma]: And in part of the narrative of Sanatan Dharm as this pure religion that has existed from
[Amit Varma]: time immemorial is also a specific narrative they're building up of Muslims.
[Amit Varma]: For example, again, quoting from your book, you write, integral to the narrative was a
[Amit Varma]: depiction of Muslim men as the other, libidinous, sexually dissipated and voluptuously lustful,
[Amit Varma]: from whom Hindu women had to be protected at all costs.
[Amit Varma]: And later you write how the Hindu nationalist organization like Gita Press called on Hindu
[Amit Varma]: women, not only to avoid lag bangles, which you know, those guys made, but also not to
[Amit Varma]: board horse carts written driven by Muslims, not to keep Muslim servants, not to invite
[Amit Varma]: Muslims prostitutes or singers and joyous occasion not to buy household items from Muslims and
[Amit Varma]: so on and so forth.
[Amit Varma]: And so it's not just a cultural narrative of the saving your women from the lustful
[Amit Varma]: Muslim male.
[Amit Varma]: But there's also the economic purpose of cutting off patronage from Muslims.
[Guest]: So you find actually a lot for is happening.
[Guest]: You see the roots there, you know, during even on Hindu code bill, maybe we'll discuss
[Guest]: it later.
[Guest]: But you find that similar thing was happening as far as the love jihad and all similar arguments
[Guest]: were happening.
[Guest]: And so Muslims kept coming to their narrative one way or the other.
[Guest]: When they discuss cow, Muslims come, when they discuss women, Muslims come, you know,
[Guest]: you protect your cows from the Muslims because they consume, you protect your Hindu women
[Guest]: because Muslim men are limited.
[Guest]: In fact, it's considered a compliment if a woman is like a cow.
[Guest]: And it also there is a deep seated inferiority complex vis-a-vis Muslim men, you find them
[Guest]: that there is something about Muslim men.
[Guest]: Why are Hindu women attracted?
[Guest]: And this I found not only in Kalyan, but even in some of the contemporary journals, for
[Guest]: instance, there was this journal, pretty popular called Hindu Punch.
[Guest]: I have some issues of that journal and you will find that this is they're constantly
[Guest]: talking about there's something wrong about us, about our women.
[Guest]: Why are they so attracted to Muslim men?
[Guest]: And they're going to do very graphic reasons, which one may not talk about.
[Guest]: But so it comes from a deep inferiority complex.
[Amit Varma]: Where do you think this insecurity comes from?
[Amit Varma]: Like, is it just a historical narrative of oh, they invaded us and raped our women and
[Amit Varma]: all of that?
[Amit Varma]: Or is it also something contemporary where they find that Muslim men are just more virile
[Guest]: and they're dominating?
[Guest]: That's the narrative of if you ask any pracharak privately, he'll tell you this virile thing
[Guest]: that you know, they're more viriles, therefore, they need four wives.
[Guest]: So they build their own world, even if you ask them how many Muslim men they know, in
[Guest]: these times, were four wives, forget four, even two wives, they don't have any name,
[Guest]: you know.
[Guest]: So this is how they build and the interesting part is that, how this narrative is still
[Guest]: alive today is not only alive, it's doing very well, actually, and especially in the
[Guest]: last six years now, more than five years.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: And one wonders whether there is any logical end to this, or it's just a really great way
[Amit Varma]: to sort of mobilize the troops, so to say, let's kind of now talk about the Gita Press's
[Amit Varma]: rising involvement in politics from the 40 onwards, because as you pointed out, when
[Amit Varma]: they started, it was like a cultural thing.
[Amit Varma]: They didn't really get involved in politics, even though Poddar was close to a lot of politicians,
[Amit Varma]: but they didn't really get involved in this, certainly they were never against the British
[Amit Varma]: in any way.
[Amit Varma]: But there were a number of sort of hot buttons which came up as the 40s came on, and one
[Amit Varma]: as independence approach was partition.
[Guest]: Tell me a bit about that.
[Guest]: Partition, see, partition, just like, as I told you, during the 30s, when the caste thing
[Guest]: came about, they turned, they forgot what the journal was meant to do, 40s, it became
[Guest]: more so.
[Guest]: 40s, in fact, so much so that in 46, one of their issue, which was called Malviyank, had
[Guest]: to be banned by the United Provinces government.
[Guest]: It was so communal, it was so communal.
[Guest]: It also had the last interview, given by Madan Mohan Malviya, he died in November.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, I believe this is the first time they did a special issue.
[Guest]: They did a special issue for anyone, they never did it for anyone in that they have
[Amit Varma]: not done it till now on anyone.
[Amit Varma]: I mean, when Poddar died, they did a special issue, no?
[Guest]: I don't think so.
[Amit Varma]: I must be mistaken.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Guest]: No, I don't think so.
[Guest]: I didn't come across any.
[Guest]: So, and then it was so communal and, you know, from, and what it was doing was, it was getting
[Guest]: information from all the newspapers, their kind of newspapers, you know, many newspapers,
[Guest]: which they thought was kind of furthering the Hindu cause.
[Guest]: And they were talking only of violence and they were very selective in news.
[Guest]: In fact, at one point, Poddar says, some of my friends are saying that, how come you're
[Guest]: only writing about Muslims killing Hindus?
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: So Hindus also killing Muslims, he admits very grudgingly.
[Guest]: The entire period, if you see from 44 onwards till almost 47, they're very, very upset.
[Guest]: They're trying to, especially once they realize that Pakistan is a reality now, there's no
[Guest]: going back, then they become even more so.
[Guest]: Now they have added grouse that, well, you listen to Muslims, you've given them.
[Guest]: So now is the time for us to turn, to become a Hindu Rashtra.
[Guest]: Okay.
[Guest]: Muslims are gone.
[Guest]: Good.
[Guest]: Now we become a Hindu Rashtra.
[Guest]: And then they find the Constituent Assembly, this gentleman Nehru is discussing Hindu code
[Guest]: bill, which freaks them out.
[Guest]: And that entire period, 44, 45 to 47, till Gandhi's assassination or before Gandhi's
[Guest]: assassination, the entire Kalyan becomes a rabidly common, issue after issue on everything,
[Guest]: you know, they ran this one, Bidacharan Shukla's father, who was a member of the Constituent
[Guest]: Assembly, and again, party, again, on the side, he was among those right wing element
[Guest]: within Congress.
[Guest]: He wrote a multi, he wrote a serial, four part series, or three part series on what
[Guest]: should happen to Hindi, you know, and very, very particular about how it should not get
[Guest]: polluted, how those should be done away with, it was a long and four part series, imagine.
[Guest]: So they were kind of bothered about everything, so what should happen post 47, now it has
[Guest]: happened.
[Guest]: But on the violence itself, and then there's this famous, which I call a fake news in what
[Guest]: this Bengali woman, this pamphlet, which they produce all over, which gets noted in Bombay,
[Guest]: we noticed in Bombay, Allahabad, Gorakhpur, and frankly, who is this woman, nobody knows.
[Guest]: And Kalyan, because of its circulation, it was reaching ordinary Hindu homes, it was,
[Guest]: and in a way, it became for RSS and various other organizations, it was a very easy vehicle
[Guest]: to get their point across.
[Guest]: In fact, entire 1946 Gorakhpur session of Hindu Mahasabha, the resolutions that they
[Guest]: pass, you find Kalyan reproducing it in a different form, as a set of demands that they
[Guest]: had from the now, New India, which was minus the Muslims, because the Pakistan had come
[Guest]: up, which is like even now you find that those same things, someone or the other is talking
[Guest]: about, especially since 2014.
[Amit Varma]: And what kind of struck me was like, on the one hand, they're very frustrated, because
[Amit Varma]: they're like the Muslims got their Pakistan, but where is our Hindu Rashtra, I think they
[Amit Varma]: use the term Khichri for what they were left with, and I love Khichri, I think it's great.
[Amit Varma]: But on the other hand, there's almost in some places, I sensed a little bit of glee that
[Amit Varma]: this is an opportunity for them to push their agenda.
[Amit Varma]: For example, quoting from your book about Noah Khali, you say, quote, the Hindu Mahasabha,
[Amit Varma]: which had dispatched senior leaders like Ashutosh Lahiri, Shama Prasad Mukherjee, NC Chatterjee
[Amit Varma]: and Pandit Narendra Nath Das to Noah Khali for relief work, did not fail to see the long
[Amit Varma]: term gain for the community.
[Amit Varma]: And now you quote within that, notwithstanding this great catastrophe, it is a matter of
[Amit Varma]: satisfaction to the members of the relief committee, to see a keen sense of fellow feeling
[Amit Varma]: now awakened amongst all Hindus in every province of India, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: So people are being slaughtered on both sides.
[Amit Varma]: And they see it as an opportunity to continue with the polarization.
[Guest]: See had Gandhi not been assassinated in 48, these guys would have been in power much,
[Guest]: much earlier, maybe not in 51, 52, they would have come to power, maybe by 57.
[Guest]: But max 62 election.
[Guest]: Really?
[Guest]: Yeah.
[Guest]: This Gandhi assassination kept them, it was set back for 20 years.
[Guest]: So you find them coming back to, you know, making noise only in the 60s.
[Guest]: Sometime, you know, 65 election, Jan Sangh, otherwise, they were in the, they were there,
[Guest]: of course, there was a strong perimeter, Jan Sangh was very much there.
[Guest]: But they never posed challenge.
[Guest]: And the generation of people, they just couldn't come to terms with this assassination.
[Guest]: They wouldn't have won 47.
[Guest]: If Gandhi was not assassinated, these guys would have come much earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And that also brings me to the question of that, is our nation's destiny then from that
[Amit Varma]: time, the way things have unveiled and unraveled, purely a question of happenstance and dumb
[Amit Varma]: luck, whether good luck or bad luck is depends on how you look at it, that there was absolutely
[Amit Varma]: just one guy who was against this tide, and that was Nehru, and he is a guy who happened
[Amit Varma]: to be Prime Minister, who happened to outlive all these other guys like your Patels and
[Amit Varma]: whatever.
[Guest]: Nehru and the whole lot, whole generation, I'll not say Nehru alone, because the whole
[Guest]: generation of people, even a lot of his colleagues, a lot of his partymen.
[Amit Varma]: But the other dominant political figures like Patel, like Panth, like Rajendra Prasad, were
[Guest]: also...
[Guest]: They were, but still, the larger, the new India, the fervor of new India, which he wanted
[Guest]: to build was very much in there.
[Guest]: There were a lot of people who subscribe to that belief.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, these institutions that Nehru built, a lot of things wouldn't have
[Guest]: happened.
[Guest]: But yes, this...
[Guest]: Otherwise, what explains in 2014, this is a question that I've been asking a lot of
[Guest]: people, I ask myself, this deep seated anger among suddenly you discover among your friends,
[Guest]: your relatives whom you have known forever, where was this all this while?
[Guest]: Why did it need 2014 election result for this kind of anger?
[Guest]: There has to be very deep seated, you know, otherwise, now people don't even care when
[Guest]: they abuse Muslims in drawing rooms or middle class drawing rooms or anywhere.
[Guest]: It's no longer...
[Guest]: I remember during Bajpayee's six years, it was not so blatant.
[Guest]: It was, but not so blatant.
[Guest]: Actually, there was no WhatsApp.
[Amit Varma]: So we don't know.
[Guest]: Can I attempt one theory?
[Guest]: Please, please.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah.
[Amit Varma]: So there's this sociologist called Timur Kuran, who in 98 or 99 wrote this book called Public
[Amit Varma]: Lies and Private Truths, something of that sort.
[Amit Varma]: And he came up with the phrase preference falsification, where he gave the example of
[Amit Varma]: the Soviet Union, where he says that look, the Soviet Union appeared to fall overnight
[Amit Varma]: as if the tide of public opinion changed suddenly, but it didn't happen like that.
[Amit Varma]: What was happening was, everybody might have been against the government, but everybody
[Amit Varma]: was afraid to speak out and they all thought they were alone, which is preference falsification.
[Amit Varma]: And suddenly, there was a what he calls a preference cascade where people suddenly begin
[Amit Varma]: to realize that everybody else is also things like them and that emboldens them and validates
[Amit Varma]: their beliefs and then they can speak openly.
[Amit Varma]: And I think what happened, and I've written about this as well, what happened in 2014
[Amit Varma]: was, because of social media, the growth of social media in the five, six years before
[Amit Varma]: that, a lot of people who I call closet bigots, but whatever, without using derogatory terms,
[Amit Varma]: a lot of people who felt a certain way, but thought they should not say it in polite society,
[Amit Varma]: suddenly realized, number one, that there are many, many more people who feel like that
[Amit Varma]: to say it openly, that validates their beliefs, that emboldens them to speak out, and the
[Amit Varma]: shoe is on the other foot.
[Amit Varma]: And that's 24.
[Guest]: I mean, that was just my take.
[Guest]: No, no, that's absolutely, I entirely agree with this.
[Guest]: But this, how did this happen?
[Guest]: You know, this, like, you know, and this continued in 2019, for instance, everyone thought there'll
[Guest]: be, you know, there'll be judged on performance.
[Guest]: And as we were discussing before the recording, demonetization happened and not a protest
[Guest]: that one knows of, you know, getting angry in a queue is not a protest, you know, that's
[Guest]: it, Indians are used to getting angry when you're queuing at the airport or railway station
[Guest]: anywhere or hospital.
[Guest]: But, and it happened, it destroyed livelihoods, destroyed lives.
[Guest]: Nothing matters to the people anymore.
[Amit Varma]: And it's a triumph of narrative.
[Amit Varma]: And in a sense, it's a triumph of the Gita Press, triumph of Gita Press, you know, this
[Guest]: is the kind of they were just saying things constantly, when they read it, not read it,
[Guest]: you will see it, it's like the classic Coke ad, you know, they'll, when you go to watch
[Guest]: the Hollywood movies in America, they'll say, drink Coke, eat popcorn, there was some catch
[Guest]: line which I've forgotten.
[Guest]: And they will do it so many times that you will, at the end of it, you'll say, I might
[Guest]: as well go and have something, you know.
[Guest]: So this constantly talking about cow, women, Muslim, the other, and when you place facts
[Guest]: before people, you know, people, the class that you and I belong to, and tell them, tell
[Guest]: me how many Muslims that you know, who have done extremely well in life, who have taken
[Guest]: away your job.
[Guest]: Damn it, I don't see Muslim kids in my kid's school, you know, how many Muslim kids that
[Guest]: she has friends in school in college, how many Muslim friends I had, what are they taking
[Amit Varma]: away then?
[Amit Varma]: No, and there's like, like, I remember this incident with this friend of mine who's done
[Amit Varma]: an MBA from a top school, has an absolute top job in the corporate sector.
[Amit Varma]: And one day we were just chilling and he said that, Amit, there's one statistic which really
[Amit Varma]: scares me and I said, what is it?
[Amit Varma]: And he said, you know, the Hindu birth replacement rate is so and so and he takes 1.9 or something
[Amit Varma]: and the Muslim rate is nine.
[Amit Varma]: And I just started laughing.
[Amit Varma]: I said that, bro, you know, this is not even something you need to fact check or Google
[Unknown]: or whatever.
[Amit Varma]: It's just common sense that this is complete rubbish and you find so many, and then you
[Amit Varma]: think that, no, they're believing this because they want to believe this.
[Guest]: They want to believe it.
[Guest]: And when you place these facts, they're not, they will not agree, they'll say, no, how
[Guest]: have you got this from?
[Guest]: What is this from?
[Guest]: You know, therefore, someone like say Pratik Sinha doing something which he does, it's
[Guest]: like really hats off to him.
[Amit Varma]: At great personal risk.
[Unknown]: I mean, he's a hero.
[Unknown]: Great personal risk.
[Guest]: He's a great hero if you ask me.
[Guest]: You know, a couple of times I have sent him a few things on Twitter, DMed him, you know,
[Guest]: and I found that he figured this out and it was brought in public domain.
[Guest]: But then again, how many people are on Twitter?
[Guest]: It's the WhatsApp, which is the most dangerous, which is where all the religious jokes to
[Guest]: everything and how quick they are with every failure which happens.
[Guest]: Like that day, Chandrayan first attempted in go for purely scientific reasons, which
[Guest]: is fine, what happens all over the world, but they took it in a completely different
[Guest]: way.
[Guest]: I got a few forwards which said, why this is, you know, this was, they gave it a new
[Guest]: twist to it, which there's no business to do.
[Guest]: And you will find that everyone and the enough takers for such narrative.
[Amit Varma]: No, and also that depressing WhatsApp forward there was about so many countries have moons
[Amit Varma]: and their flags, but we have a flag on the moon, at which point I'm thinking, what's
[Amit Varma]: the point?
[Guest]: You know, what are you going to do with the millions of jobless people in this country?
[Guest]: You're going to send them?
[Amit Varma]: Send them.
[Amit Varma]: Nobody is worried about this.
[Amit Varma]: It's insane.
[Amit Varma]: To kind of get back to the subject of the Gita Press and politics, and you know, you
[Amit Varma]: brought up the Hindu code bill a couple of times, and I do want to talk about that.
[Amit Varma]: And I also want to talk about that, because there's a larger question I want to ask you,
[Amit Varma]: which is a very difficult larger question, which is the relationship between the state
[Amit Varma]: and society.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, right.
[Amit Varma]: Like I had Rahul Verma, the political scientist on my show a while back, and he was talking
[Amit Varma]: about one of the two ideological cleavages in India, we have different ideological cleavages
[Amit Varma]: from the West, according to him, the left, right doesn't really apply here.
[Amit Varma]: And one of those ideological cleavages is statism, that what is the role of the state
[Amit Varma]: in relation to society.
[Amit Varma]: And whereas the Western conception, the post enlightenment conception would be that, you
[Amit Varma]: know, the state sort of you need the state for there to be society because someone's
[Amit Varma]: got to protect your rights and blah, blah, blah.
[Amit Varma]: But the Hindu conception, according to him, and the conception which all these Hindu nationalists
[Amit Varma]: and the Gita Press people would share is that no society has existed from before.
[Amit Varma]: The purpose of the state is to serve society, which to a certain degree even I agree with,
[Amit Varma]: but the kind of society that I view where individual rights are protected, and so on
[Amit Varma]: is completely different from these people's vision of it.
[Amit Varma]: But nevertheless, their fundamental point is that our society is what it is for a reason,
[Amit Varma]: and the state has no business interfering in it.
[Amit Varma]: And this greater philosophical dilemma is what is again at the heart of the Hindu code
[Amit Varma]: bill.
[Amit Varma]: What do you think about this?
[Guest]: Yes, in fact, Hindu code bill, I was talking to someone while researching that Hindu code
[Guest]: bill and he said that, you know, the greatest suspicion which Hindus have, or at least this
[Guest]: prominent Hindu groups, RSS or Vishwa Hindu Parishad or Mahasabha had at that point was
[Guest]: and it Hindu code bill they faced successfully, see, the government managed to bring the bills
[Guest]: eventually from broken into four, but they managed, the Hindu right groups managed to
[Guest]: be this martyr, you know, why only this communities.
[Guest]: So this narrative of state only trying to do something to Hindus, not to Muslims.
[Guest]: So that is a great rejoice about what government has done more among Hindus than among Muslim
[Guest]: women, I think, or this triple talaq, all the Muslim women I know, my friends, everyone
[Amit Varma]: no one thinks that is such a big deal, you know, it's not relevant to them.
[Guest]: But you find that Hindus are suddenly like more worried about Muslim women than anything
[Guest]: else.
[Guest]: They think it's you did this to us, state did this to us, the great secular state of
[Guest]: Nehru did this to us in the 50s.
[Guest]: So now it's your turn.
[Guest]: And for whatever reason, they think triple talaq is the biggest problem facing Muslim
[Guest]: women, which it is not.
[Guest]: But anyway, so yes, they have a suspicion and they also have been very successfully
[Guest]: managed to create, cultivate this thing that state has always been after them.
[Guest]: And 60 years and the entire Congress rule, years of Congress rule as seen as basically
[Guest]: anti-Hindu years, and which they have successfully.
[Guest]: So every time, so Nehru has to be invoked, therefore, you know, what this happened the
[Guest]: other day, Amit Shah is saying something about that in Kashmir.
[Guest]: This happened because of Nehru.
[Guest]: Then this, where Priyanka Gandhi went, Eastern UP, Yogi is saying, you know, this was done
[Guest]: during Congress.
[Guest]: So this is funny.
[Amit Varma]: Now it's becoming absurd, actually, you know.
[Amit Varma]: Nehru's actually, you forget Nehru, the real person, yeah, Nehru's become like a mythological
[Unknown]: figure like Ravana.
[Amit Varma]: I think in Dasarath, they'll put up a Nehru-
[Guest]: Because there is a land dispute, someone goes and kills 10 Dalits.
[Guest]: And you're saying because of what Congress rule did in between, you also ruled, BJP ruled
[Guest]: for long, UP.
[Amit Varma]: So this is becoming a bit comical, actually, now.
[Amit Varma]: No, and honestly, look, what I would say is that there are a lot of criticisms that I
[Amit Varma]: can level against Nehru's economic policies, the Congress government.
[Guest]: He was full of his flaws, yeah, absolutely.
[Amit Varma]: But this is just taking it to a new level, like you said, you know, you can't parody
[Guest]: this shit.
[Guest]: Now it's becoming a joke that some killing happens and then you're blaming Congress rule
[Guest]: of the 50s.
[Amit Varma]: Oh, what do you do?
[Amit Varma]: Right.
[Amit Varma]: And another slightly, you know, and I found this very funny, you know, it was a hot button
[Amit Varma]: once.
[Amit Varma]: It's no longer a hot button.
[Amit Varma]: But once upon a time, it was a hot button and a big cause for the Gita Press, which
[Amit Varma]: is communism.
[Guest]: Yeah, it was, it was, in fact, because directly, see, it was most prominent in Bengal.
[Guest]: And that's where the Marwadi's, the good old Marwadi world existed in Calcutta, shift to
[Guest]: Bombay happened much later.
[Guest]: In fact, even now, some of the big Marwadi companies still have work out of, they dominate
[Amit Varma]: Calcutta.
[Unknown]: They dominate even now.
[Guest]: And they even fund films in Bombay from there.
[Guest]: So, and this was a real challenge.
[Guest]: And you have to give it to them, they figured this out much before.
[Guest]: In fact, they were, they were having this two part series article on Samevaad in Russia
[Guest]: and all kinds of, and somehow, again, this some deprivation you need to bring it everything
[Guest]: down to women, you know, they'll say, yeh communism mein sabse zyada problem mahilaon
[Guest]: ke saath hota hai.
[Guest]: And then they will say that one woman has to have a relationship with 20 men, all kinds
[Guest]: of absurd, unfounded, you know, women exist for society.
[Guest]: So anyone can have any kind of relationship with women.
[Guest]: So I think they realized that this immediately strikes a chord among the readers of people
[Guest]: that, you know, this is what the new ideology is all about.
[Guest]: And they were early on to realize that this is going to create problem for them in Bengal.
[Guest]: Because Bengal forever has been, you know, right from the beginning of the 20th century,
[Guest]: even before that, Marwadis have been there in Bengal.
[Guest]: So you have to, they figured out, built good alliance with RSS groups, others, even saying
[Guest]: in one letter, they're saying that we have to learn from the this communists also, how
[Guest]: they do this pamphlets.
[Guest]: So we have to do the pamphlets, we have to learn and do similar thing, otherwise, we'll
[Amit Varma]: be finished.
[Amit Varma]: And the recent results in Lok Sabha elections, you know, you mentioned the views of communism
[Amit Varma]: and how that went to women.
[Amit Varma]: And I have to quote this because I'm sorry, I find this so funny, if someone's offended,
[Amit Varma]: I apologize.
[Amit Varma]: But I just find this hilarious, quote, among several example of Karpatri's regressive views,
[Unknown]: this is Karpatri Maharaj, he was one of the, yeah.
[Amit Varma]: Among several examples of Karpatri's regressive views, the most offensive were his statements
[Amit Varma]: on women.
[Amit Varma]: The new concept of women workers and the liberty it provided them, a product of the Industrial
[Amit Varma]: Revolution, common to both capitalist and communist ideologies, was considered a threat
[Amit Varma]: to the Hindu social order where a woman was limited to the domestic sphere as daughter,
[Amit Varma]: wife or mother.
[Amit Varma]: Karpatri said, Lenin had challenged the concept of pativrata nari, devoted wife.
[Amit Varma]: In Marxism, since everything was state owned, there was no need for a woman to be in a relationship
[Amit Varma]: with one man.
[Amit Varma]: As there were no laws of inheritance and private ownership of property, Karpatri said, a woman
[Amit Varma]: became like a bucket of water that could quench the thirst of many men, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: This is how they used to write.
[Guest]: And then this man is absolutely revered by.
[Guest]: He is revered.
[Guest]: No, but he became a bit of a, later years, he became a liability.
[Guest]: In fact, he was, he wanted his whole take was in the rural economy, a very regressive
[Guest]: rural economy.
[Guest]: Even Jansang, beyond a point, dumped him.
[Guest]: I think he did well in the first election for, he got some six, seven seats, he got
[Guest]: few seats.
[Guest]: Then two elections he did, and then slowly he sank, and this book itself is hilarious.
[Guest]: It's a fat volume, which I consider a lot of people have been asking me to lend me a
[Guest]: volume.
[Guest]: Lend me this volume.
[Amit Varma]: I said, only if you promise to return it.
[Amit Varma]: Is it an English translation?
[Guest]: In fact, I had asked Gita Press people, they said, no, nobody translates.
[Guest]: I can, I don't know who will have the guts to, it's a fat volume, going in all directions.
[Amit Varma]: And another thing I found very funny was how the Gita Press then strategizes that they
[Amit Varma]: are going to co-opt communism, and they're going to contrast Russian communism with an
[Amit Varma]: Indian communism, which they claimed originated in Hinduism.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm again going to quote a delightful book from your book, where you say, quote,
[Amit Varma]: two similarities were noted between Indian and Russian communisms.
[Amit Varma]: The first would delight even the most serious of political theorists.
[Amit Varma]: It said that Lord Krishna, the originator of Indian communism, dallied with Gopis, hardworking
[Amit Varma]: milkmaids, just as the fathers of Russian communism were involved with humble peasants
[Amit Varma]: and workers.
[Amit Varma]: The second similarity was more to the point, both versions were aimed at the betterment
[Amit Varma]: of the poor and downtrodden, stop quote.
[Amit Varma]: And then another writer called Charu Chandramitra argued that the basic mantra of communism
[Amit Varma]: from each according to his ability, to each according to his need, was already practiced
[Amit Varma]: in India through the joint family system.
[Guest]: But you have to give it to them for trying at least, they were trying to get onto, for
[Guest]: a religious journal to be aware of this danger, although the way they dealt with this danger
[Guest]: is very funny and very unscholarly, but that's how they were, you know.
[Guest]: But for them it was really, in fact, see this side of Poddar, which I wanted to write more,
[Guest]: I found few instances, he had also become a big figure in matters of business for Marwadis.
[Guest]: For instance, when this whole Dalmia cement and ACC thing is happening, everyone is asking
[Guest]: him to intervene, because ACC was a big MNC coming, it would have destroyed Dalmia cement.
[Guest]: And what he does is he somehow, he plays some role, whereby they come together, actually
[Guest]: that becomes it's a, so it becomes Dalmia ACC, they create a joint group rather than
[Amit Varma]: fighting with each other.
[Amit Varma]: He's like an elder statesman.
[Guest]: Yeah, he's an elder statesman.
[Guest]: And much later also, even when you find the Dalmia, he was very closely associated with
[Guest]: Dalmia family.
[Guest]: Even small matters, when the entire separation took place, Times of India, Jains moved out
[Guest]: from the father-in-law Dalmia, Sao Santiprasad Jain, and the matter went to court, the Vivian
[Guest]: Commission report, they say that it is a limited company, it's a listed company.
[Guest]: And they're completely disregarding the shareholders, they're taking all the decisions.
[Guest]: And they're saying, how did you take the decision, they're saying, because Bhaiji told us.
[Guest]: And Bhaiji is saying them in a very, you know, good old Baniya way of dividing property or
[Guest]: business, which is not entirely yours, you have shareholders, you know, you're answerable
[Guest]: to them.
[Guest]: And so he was playing a big role even in that Vivian Bose Commission report is full of Podare
[Guest]: actually.
[Guest]: So this man had his foot everywhere, you know.
[Amit Varma]: So here's a question that kind of strikes me and tell me what you think of this.
[Amit Varma]: My observation when I finished the book and contextualizing it to the current times, was
[Amit Varma]: that for much of the last few decades, the movement at the Gita Press was spearheading
[Amit Varma]: with the alliance that it built together of all the Hindu groups, Mahasabha RSS and so
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Amit Varma]: So the movement that it was spearheading had success within the culture, but not within
[Amit Varma]: politics.
[Amit Varma]: It was a cultural success, but not a political success.
[Amit Varma]: And I'm just wondering whether today that they've gained this enormous political success,
[Amit Varma]: there is also a slight cultural downswing because of the dual forces of globalization
[Amit Varma]: and urbanization.
[Amit Varma]: That while it may seem that okay, the project has succeeded, could it be said that actually
[Amit Varma]: culturally as we become more and more exposed to the globe, as we are say incorporating
[Amit Varma]: hip hop in a film like Gully Boy, or as more and more people are getting aspirational in
[Amit Varma]: different ways than they would earlier.
[Amit Varma]: And as more and more of India is urbanizing, which, you know, tends to put people together,
[Amit Varma]: more squeezed together and less likely to discriminate because they are part of those
[Amit Varma]: economic networks for self interest.
[Amit Varma]: And again, I'm just completely speculating, and I think you'd be better off.
[Guest]: I'm not really sure whether, see, all this has happened, but how do you kind of explain
[Guest]: some of these people who also do, I'm just giving an example of a friend, I don't want
[Guest]: to name him, who is completely postmodern in his, when it comes to his choice of music,
[Guest]: or even some bit of literature, but extremely conservative, and I've asked him.
[Guest]: And he said that it coexists.
[Guest]: For instance, how does one explain the grand success of Article 15, okay, and Kabir, what
[Guest]: is that movie?
[Guest]: Kabir Singh.
[Guest]: So I was telling this friend of mine, he said, you know, both of them have made money.
[Guest]: What is happening to our society?
[Guest]: Article 15 also made money, it's a successful movie, which is very serious movie.
[Guest]: Well, a lot of my Dalit activist friends are upset over other reasons, which is fine, which
[Amit Varma]: one can argue.
[Guest]: But as a mainstream film, it has done very well.
[Guest]: And it almost coincided with Kabir Singh, which is supposed to be kind of a money spinner
[Guest]: made some 200 crores.
[Guest]: So what is happening to society?
[Guest]: I don't know, we're becoming more cosmopolitan, global, as you said.
[Guest]: But it's like, one of my other friends says that it's an NRI phenomena, which is now we
[Guest]: see more here, you know, you want to make your money working for the MNCs, but when
[Guest]: it comes to vote, you want to vote for a guy who is like socially conservative, God knows
[Guest]: what he does.
[Guest]: So this is some bit of it is happening here.
[Guest]: Otherwise, you know, let's just look at all the NRI crowd, you know, all of us have NRI
[Guest]: relatives who are like, completely vouching for completely conservative politics.
[Guest]: If they had their way, Pakistan would not exist.
[Guest]: They're sitting in New York or sitting in London is very easy for them.
[Guest]: It would spontaneously combust.
[Guest]: So I really don't know how this these things are happening to a society we are becoming.
[Guest]: So culturally, this project, as you said, there is a downslide to it, there's a down.
[Guest]: Maybe it will happen, because it has to happen.
[Guest]: Because in the last five years, we've seen nothing and we have been seeing it even otherwise.
[Guest]: But now, past five years have been very pronounced on your face, like, we have, we are there,
[Guest]: you take it, you have no choice, you leave it.
[Guest]: As someone other day said that, you know, this Guardian article on Turkish intellectuals
[Guest]: of what they did, just simply said your time is over, you know, to that good old, now bad
[Guest]: word called liberals.
[Guest]: Similar thing is happening in India.
[Guest]: But for how long, whether this will continue, whether people will forget their jobs, their
[Guest]: other things, and continue to be part of this project and vote for a party which only talks
[Guest]: of religion, talks of segregation, talks of hate.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: What you said is really thought provoking in terms of Article 15 and Kabir Singh both
[Amit Varma]: doing well.
[Amit Varma]: And it strikes me that it doesn't mean that in this large country with millions of people
[Amit Varma]: that entirely different audiences watch those two films.
[Amit Varma]: I think there must be many people who watch both films and like them for different reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Like them for different reasons.
[Amit Varma]: Because people contain multiple views.
[Guest]: It's completely Foxpeel.
[Guest]: How is this, both the movies doing well?
[Amit Varma]: Because I guess, if I'm again thinking aloud, and maybe this is simplistic, but Kabir Singh
[Amit Varma]: might appeal to certain impulses that people have.
[Amit Varma]: And Article 15 may appeal to the more rational side of, and obviously what people like you
[Amit Varma]: and me hope for is that the rationality wins out in the long run.
[Amit Varma]: So I'll end this episode by asking you a question I ask many of my guests on whatever subject
[Amit Varma]: we're discussing, that looking into the future, and I normally say 10 years, but in this case,
[Amit Varma]: because you know, your book has covered a century and all of that, I'll give it a slightly
[Amit Varma]: longer span.
[Amit Varma]: Looking into the future over the next 20 years, what gives you despair and what gives you
[Amit Varma]: hope about the state of Indian society?
[Guest]: First, the despair.
[Guest]: My despair is, biggest despair is that our institutions will be destroyed beyond redemption
[Guest]: so badly.
[Guest]: And when I talk of institution, I don't mean one university here, one university there,
[Guest]: the larger fabric of the way we discuss, the Supreme Court, the RBI, you know, and the
[Guest]: discourse, the narrative, the institution, the discourse, discourse for all time to come,
[Guest]: I think it's vitiated for a long, long time, and it's not going to go away so easily.
[Guest]: You have poison, and I talked to my daughter also, who's 18 year old university going girl,
[Guest]: and she tells me things which is not, at times, it gives me great, it makes me very, very
[Guest]: despair.
[Guest]: But then I also see bookstores, I see, I meet people who are worried, I meet very young
[Guest]: students, again, at the same time, who tell you that they don't approve, you go for, lit
[Guest]: fest might not be the exact answer to say, because these are happening in very urban
[Guest]: spaces, these are children who brought up in a very different way.
[Guest]: But even in small towns, I've been to a few small towns also, and I see there's some bit
[Guest]: of, in the long run, I think the constitution, to sum it up, in the long run, I think, you
[Guest]: know, the constitution will be upheld, we will, and the institutional, for instance,
[Guest]: media, this can't go on for long, nobody will read you, media also knows, media has lost
[Guest]: its credibility, while serving one party, certain government, they've lost the credibility.
[Guest]: So I, and at the same time, even the mainstream media has failed, you have a parallel media,
[Guest]: which has given us hope, which is, and what will be without hope, you know, and we have
[Guest]: seen societies around us, we have not suffered as much as Pakistan has suffered, or Turkey
[Guest]: is suffering or various other states.
[Guest]: So and they've come out of it in various ways, they fought, so I'm sure people will fight.
[Guest]: This can't go on, this, this, this sarad of nationalism, this whole thing will not go
[Amit Varma]: on.
[Guest]: And our Khichri is a resilient Khichri.
[Guest]: Yeah, our Khichri is a resilient Khichri, it has to survive.
[Guest]: That's the only way we can survive, you know, all of us.
[Amit Varma]: Akshay, I'm so honoured that you gave me so much of your time today.
[Guest]: Thank you so much for coming.
[Guest]: It was a real pleasure, Amit, talking to you.
[Unknown]: I haven't had this kind of discussion in a long, long time.
[Unknown]: Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do head on over to your nearest bookstore
[Amit Varma]: online or offline and pick up a copy of Gita Press and the Making of Hindu India by Akshay
[Amit Varma]: Mukul.
[Amit Varma]: In this episode, we merely touched the surface.
[Amit Varma]: I have a few thousand words of note.
[Amit Varma]: So it's a remarkable book with a lot of depth, please pick it up.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow Akshay on Twitter at Akshay Mukul, one word, A-K-S-H-A-Y-A-M-U-K-U-L.
[Amit Varma]: You can follow me at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-B-A-R-M-A.
[Amit Varma]: You can browse past episodes of The Scene and the Unseen at sceneunseen.in, thinkpragati.com
[Amit Varma]: and ivmpodcast.com.
[Amit Varma]: The Scene and the Unseen is supported by the Takshashila Institution, an independent centre
[Amit Varma]: for research in education and public policy.
[Amit Varma]: Takshashila offers 12-week courses in public policy, technology policy and strategic studies
[Amit Varma]: for both full-time students and working professionals.
[Amit Varma]: Visit takshashila.org.in for more details.
[Amit Varma]: Thank you for listening.
[Unknown]: Filter coffee is a fascinating beverage.
[Unknown]: You need to pick the right beans, blend them in the right proportion, roast them to perfection
[Unknown]: and slow brew at the right temperature to get the perfect cup, which is exactly like
[Unknown]: great conversations as well.
[Unknown]: You need to track down the most interesting minds, get them into their zone and settle
[Unknown]: down for an unhurried, unscripted chat.
[Unknown]: And coffee for me is always, always, always best enjoyed with friends.
[Unknown]: I am Karthik Nagarajan and do share my table as I meet some of the most interesting people
[Unknown]: I know and sit them down for a strong cup of coffee and an even stronger conversation.
[Unknown]: Join me every Wednesday for a freshly brewed episode.
[Unknown]: This is not frappe, this is the filter coffee podcast.
[Unknown]: Hi, I'm Satyajit.
[Unknown]: Hi, I'm Racheta.
[Unknown]: We are from the Open Library Project and we host a podcast called Paperback.
[Unknown]: Paperback is a podcast where we engage with stalwarts and experts from various industries,
[Unknown]: suggesting nonfiction titles that contributed to their journey in a big way.
[Unknown]: We've had guests like Anjali Raina, Dr. Marcus Rani, Dr. Swati Lodha, Ambi Parameswaran,
[Unknown]: Apoorva Damani and many more on our show, Paperback.
[Unknown]: Find new episodes every Wednesday on IVM Podcast app, website or wherever you listen
[Unknown]: to podcasts.